1
Collected Essays 
by Aldous Huxley 
 
Back Cover: 
 
 All over the English-speaking world cr itics have greeted these essays with such comments as "brilliant. . . 
provocative. . . magnificent." Many find that  Huxley is the finest essayist sin ce Montaigne. It has been said that 
"Mr. Huxley is not only a literary giant, but one of the greatest thinkers of our time." 
 Mr. Huxley's topic is man, the total compass of his facu lties in science, literature, music, religion, art, love, 
sex, speculative thinking and simple bei ng. Here, displayed to the full, is th e astonishing virtuosity of Huxley's 
genius. 
  
 The range of Aldous Huxley's thinking was astonishi ng. His opinions on art were  as original and well-
founded as his discussions of biology or  architecture, poetry, music, or hist ory. As a virtuoso of letters, he was 
unequalled. 
 Born into a famous family with a long intellect ual tradition, Huxley attended Eton and Oxford. His 
reputation as a writer was well-establis hed before he was thirty. Mr. Huxley  was not only a master essayist; in 
1959 he received the American Academy of Arts and Letters Award of Merit for "having done the best work of our 
time in what threatens to be a neglected field, the novel of ideas." 
 His novels include Crome Yellow and The Genius and the Goddess. 
 
 
This low-priced Bantam Book 
has been completely reset in a type face 
designed for easy reading and was printed 
from new plates. It contains the complete 
text of the original hard-cover edition, 
NOT ONE WORD HAS BEEN OMITTED. 
 
COLLECTED ESSAYS 
A Bantam Book / published by arrangement with 
Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc. 
 
PRINTING HISTORY 
Harper &. Row edition published August 1959 
2nd printing . . . . . . . August 1959 
3rd printing . . . . September 1959 
4th printing . . . . . . . March 1960 
Marboro Book Club edition published September 1959 
Published as a Bantam Classic October 1960 
2nd printing. . . . . . . March 1964 
 
All rights In this book are reserved. 
Copyright © 1923, 1925, 1926, 1928, 1929, 1930, 1931, 
1934, 1937, 1941, 1946, 1949, 1950, 1951, 1952, 1953, 
1954, 1955, 1956, 1957, 1958, 1959, by Aldous Huxley. 
Copyright © 1943 by Crown Publishers. 
Copyright © 1958 by The Curtis Publishing Company. 
 
No part of the book may be used or reproduced in 
any manner whatsoever without written permission 
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in 
critical articles and reviews. For information 
address: Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc., 49 East 
33rd Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
 
Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, Inc. 
Its trade-mark, consisting of the words "Bantam Books" 
and the portrayal of a bantam, is registered in the United 
States Patent Office and in other countries. Marca 
Registrada. Printed in the United States of America. 
Bantam books, Inc., 271 Madison Ave., New York 16, N. Y.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

2
Preface 
 
 "I am a man and alive," wrote D. H. Lawrence. "F or this reason I am a noveli st. And, being a novelist, I 
consider myself superior to the sain t, the scientist, the philosopher, and the poet, who are all great masters of 
different bits of man alive, but never get the whole hog. . . Only in the novel are all things given full play." 
 What is true of the novel is only a little less true of the essay. For, li ke the novel, the e ssay is a literary 
device for saying almost everything about almost anything. By tradition, almost by defi nition, the essay is a short 
piece, and it is therefore impossible to give all things full play within the limits of a single essay. But a collection 
of essays can cover almost as much ground, and cover it  almost as thoroughly as can a long novel. Montaigne's 
Third Book is the equivalent, very nearly, of a good slice of the Comédie Humaine. 
 Essays belong to a literary species whose extreme variab ility can be studied most effectively within a three-
poled frame of reference. There is the pole of the pe rsonal and the autobiographical; there is the pole of the 
objective, the factual, the concrete-particular; and there is  the pole of the abstract-universal. Most essayists are at 
home and at their best in the neighborhood of only one of the essay's three poles,  or at the most only in the 
neighborhood of two of them. There are the predominantly personal essayists,  who write fragments of reflective 
autobiography and who look at the world through the keyhole of anecdote and description. There are the 
predominantly objective essayists who do not speak directly of themselves, but turn their attention outward to some 
literary or scientific or political theme. Their art c onsists in setting forth, passing judgment upon, and drawing 
general conclusions from, the relevant data. In a third group we find those essayists who do their work in the world 
of high abstractions, who never condesce nd to be personal and who hardly dei gn to take notice of the particular 
facts, from which their generalizations were originally drawn. Each kind of essay has its special merits and defects. 
The personal essayists may be as good as Charles Lamb at hi s best, or as bad as Mr. X at  his cutest and most self-
consciously whimsical. The objective essay may be as lively, as brassily contentious as a piece by Macaulay; but it 
may also, with fatal ease, degenerate into something merely informative or, if it be critical, into something merely 
learned and academic. And how splendid, how truly oracular ar e the utterances of the gr eat generalizes! "He that 
hath wife and children hath given hostages to fortune; for they are impediments to great enterprises, either of virtue 
or mischief." And from Bacon we pass to Emerson. "All  men plume themselves on the improvement of society, 
and no man improves. Society never advances. It recedes as fast on one side as it gains on the other. For everything 
that is given, something is taken." Ev en a Baltasar Gracian, that briefest of essayists who writes as though he were 
cabling his wisdom, at two dollars a word, to the Anti podes, sometimes achieves a cer tain magnificence. "Things 
have their period; even excellences are subject to fashion. The sage has one advantage: he is immortal. If this is not 
his century, many others will be." But the medal of solemn and lapidary generalization has its reverse. The 
constantly abstract, constantly impersonal essayist is apt to  give us not oracles but alge bra. As an example of such 
algebraic writing, let me quote a short passage from  the English translation of Paul Valéry's Dialogues. It is worth 
remarking that French literature has a tradition of high a nd sustained abstraction; English literature has not. Works 
that in French are not at all out of the common seem, when  translated, strange almost to the point of absurdity. But 
even when made acceptable by tradition and a great talent, th e algebraic style strikes us as being very remote from 
the living reality of our immediate experi ence. Here, in the words of an imagin ary Socrates, is Valery's description 
of the kind of language in which (as I think, unfortunately ) he liked to write. "What is more mysterious than 
clarity? what more capricious than the way in which light  and shade are distributed over the hours and over men? 
Certain peoples lose themselves in th eir thoughts, but for the Greeks all things are form s. We retain only their 
relations and, enclosed, as it were, in the limpid day, Orpheus like we buil d, by means of the word, temples of 
wisdom and science that may suffice fo r all reasonable creatures. This great ar t requires of us an admirably exact 
language. The very word that signifies language is also the name, with us, for reason and calcul ation; the same 
word says these three things." In the stratosphere of abst ract notions this elegant alge bra is all very well; but a 
completely bodiless language can never do justice to th e data of immediate experience, nor can it contribute 
anything to our understanding of the "capricious lights and shades" in the midst of which, whether we like it or not, 
we must perforce live out our lives. 
 The most richly satisfying essays ar e those which make the best not of one, not of two, but of all the three 
worlds in which it is possible for the essay to exist.  Freely, effortlessly, thought and feeling move in these 
consummate works of art, hither and thither between the es say's three poles -- from th e personal to the universal,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

3
from the abstract back to the concrete, from the objective datum to the inner experience. 
 The perfection of any artistic form is  rarely achieved by its first inventor. To this rule Montaigne is the 
great and marvelous exception. By the time he had written his way into the Third Book, he had reached the limits 
of his newly discovered art. "What are these essays," he had asked at the be ginning of his caree r, "but grotesque 
bodies pieced together of different members, without a ny definite shape, without any order, coherence, or 
proportion, except they be accidental."  But a few years later the patchwor k grotesques had turned into living 
organisms, into multiform hybrids like those beautiful monsters of the ol d mythologies, the mermaids, the man-
headed bulls with wings, the centaurs, the Anubises, th e seraphim -- impossibilities compounded of incompatibles, 
but compounded from within, by a proce ss akin to growth, so that the huma n trunk seems to spring quite naturally 
from between the horse's shoulders, the fish modulates into  the full-breasted Siren as easily and inevitably as a 
musical theme modulates from one key to  another. Free association artistically  controlled -- this is the paradoxical 
secret of Montaigne's best essays. One damned thing af ter another -- but in a sequence that in some almost 
miraculous way develops a central th eme and relates it to the rest of human experience. And how beautifully 
Montaigne combines the generalizati on with the anecdote, the homily with  the autobiographical reminiscence! 
How skilfully he makes use of the concrete particular, the chose vue, to express some universal truth, and to 
express it more powerfully and penetratingly than it can be  expressed by even the most oracular of the dealers in 
generalities! Here, for example, is wh at a great oracle, Dr. Johnson, has to say about the human situation and the 
uses of adversity. "Affliction is inseparabl e from our present state; it adheres to  all the inhabitants of this world, in 
different proportions indeed, but with an allotment whic h seems very little regulated by our own conduct. It has 
been the boast of some swelling moralists that every man's fortune was in his own power, that prudence supplied 
the place of all other divinities, and that happiness is the unfailing consequence of virtue. But, surely, the quiver of 
Omnipotence is stored with arrows, against which the sh ield of human virtue, however adamantine it has been 
boasted, is held up in vain; we do not always suffer by our  crimes, we are not always protected by our innocence. . 
. Nothing confers so much ability to resist the temptations that perpetually surround us, as an habitual consideration 
of the shortness of life, and the uncertainty of those plea sures that solicit our pursuit; a nd this consideration can be 
inculcated only by affliction." This is  altogether admirable; but there are other and, I would say, better ways of 
approaching the subject. "J'ay veu en mon temps cent artisans, cent laboureurs, plus sages et plus heureux que des 
Recteurs de l'Universite." (I have seen in my time hundreds of artisa ns and laborers, wise r and happier than 
university presidents.) Again, "Look at poor working peop le sitting on the ground with  drooping heads after their 
day's toil. They know neither Aristotle nor Cato, neither  example nor precept; and yet from them Nature draws 
effects of constancy and patience pure r and more unconquerable than any of those we study so curiously in the 
schools." Add to one touch of nature one touch of ir ony, and you have a comment on life more profound, in spite 
of its casualness, its seeming levity, than the most eloquent rumblings of the oracles. "It is not our follies that make 
me laugh," says Montaigne, "it is ou r sapiences." And why should our sapien ces provoke a wise man to laughter? 
Among other reasons, because the professional sages tend to express themselves in a language of highest 
abstraction and widest generality  -- a language that, for all its gnomic solemn ity is apt, in a tight corner, to reveal 
itself as ludicrously inappropriate to the facts of life as it is really and tragically lived. 
 In the course of the last forty years I have written essays of every size and shape and color. Essays almost 
as short as Gracian's and, on occasion, longer even than Ma caulay's. Essays autobiographical. Essays about things 
seen and places visited. Essays in criticism of all kinds of works of art, literary, pl astic, musical. Essays about 
philosophy and religion, some of them couched in abstract terms, others in the form of an anthology with 
comments, others again in which general ideas are approached through the concrete facts of history and biography. 
Essays, finally, in which, following Montaigne, I have tried to  make the best of all the essay's three worlds, have 
tried to say everything at once in as near an approach to contrapuntal simultaneity as the nature of literary art will 
allow of. 
 Sometimes, it seems to me, I have succeeded fairly well in doing what, in one field or another, I had set out 
to do. Sometimes, alas, I know that I have not succeeded. But "please do not shoot the pianist; he is doing his best." 
Doing his best, selon ses quelques doigts perclus, to make his cottage upright say as much as the great orchestra of 
the novel, doing his best to "give all thi ngs full play." For the writ er at least, and perhaps al so for the reader, it is 
better to have tried and failed to achieve perfection than never to have tried at all. 
ALDOUS HUXLEY

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

4
Contents 
 
 Preface 
 
 
S E C T I O N  1             p . 5  
 
  N a t u r e             p . 5  
 W o r d s w o r t h  i n  t h e  T r o p i c s            
 The Olive Tree           p.10 
 The Desert           p.15 
 
  Travel            p.19  
 T h e  P a l i o  a t  S i e n a            
 Sabbioneta           p.23 
 Between Peshawar and Lahore        p.26 
 Jaipur            p.28 
 Atitlan            p.29 
 Sololà            p.30 
 Copan            p.30 
 In a Tunisian Oasis          p.32 
 Miracle in Lebanon          p.36 
 
  Love, Sex, and Physical Beauty         p.39  
 Beauty in 1920  
 Fashions in Love           p.40 
 Sermons in Cats           p.44 
 Appendix           p.46 
 
 
SECTION II            p.51 
 
  Literature    
 Subject-Matter of Poetry  
 Tragedy and the Whole Truth         p.53  
 Vulgarity in Literature          p.57 
 D. H. Lawrence           p.63 
 Famagusta or Paphos          p.70 
 
  Painting            p.73  
 Breughel 
 Meditation on El Greco         p.78 
 Form and Spirit in Art          p.81 
 Variations on Goya          p.84 
 Landscape Painting as a Vision-Inducing Art      p.89 
 
  Music             p.92  
 Popular Music 
 Music at Night          p.94 
 Gesualdo: Variations on a Musical Theme       p.96

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

5
  Matters of Taste and Style          p.103  
 Variations on a Baroque Tomb    
 Faith, Taste, and History         p.108 
 
 
SECTION III            p.114 
 
  History     
 Maine de Biran: The Philosopher in History 
 Usually Destroyed          p.123 
  
  Politics            p.128  
 Words and Behavior  
 Decentralization and Self -Government       p.133 
 Politics and Religion           p.140 
 The Scientist's Role           p.148 
 Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow       p.150 
 
 
SECTION IV            p.155 
 
  Psychology   
 Madness, Badness, Sadness  
 A Case of Voluntary Ignorance        p.159  
 The Oddest Science          p.164 
 
  Rx for Sense and Psyche          p.169  
 The Doors of Perception  
 Drugs That Shape Men's Minds        p.173 
 
  Way of Life            p.179  
 Holy Face     
 Pascal            p.181 
 Beliefs            p.186 
 Knowledge and Understanding        p.194

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

6
SECTION I 
 
 
NATURE 
 
 
Wordsworth in the Tropics 
 
 In the neighborhood of latitude fift y north, and for the last  hundred years or therea bouts, it has been an 
axiom that Nature is divine and morally uplifting. For good Wordsworthians -- and most serious-minded people are 
now Wordsworthians, either by direct in spiration or at second hand -- a walk in  the country is the equivalent of 
going to church, a tour through Westmorla nd is as good as a pilgrimage to Jeru salem. To commune with the fields 
and waters, the woodlands and the hills , is to commune, according to our modern and northern ideas, with the 
visible manifestations of the "Wisdom and Spirit of the Universe." 
 The Wordsworthian who exports this pantheistic worshi p of Nature to the tropics is liable to have his 
religious convictions somewhat rudely  disturbed. Nature, under a vertical sun, and nourished by the equatorial 
rains, is not at all like that chas te, mild deity who presides over the Gemüthlichkeit, the prettiness, the cozy 
sublimities of the Lake District. The worst that Wordsworth's goddess ever did to him was to make him hear 
 
 Low breathings coming after me, and sounds  
 Of undistinguishable motion, steps  
 Almost as silent as the turf they trod;  
 
was to make him realize, in the shape of "a huge p eak, black and huge," the ex istence of "unknown modes of 
being." He seems to have imagined that this was the worst Nature could do. A few weeks in Malaya or Borneo 
would have undeceived him. Wandering in the hothouse darkness of the jungle, he  would not have felt so serenely 
certain of those "Presences of Nature,"  those "Souls of Lonely Pl aces," which he was in the habit of worshipping 
on the shores of Windermere and Rydal. Th e sparse inhabitants of the equatorial forest are all believers in devils. 
When one has visited, in even the most superficial manner,  the places where they live, it is difficult not to share 
their faith. The jungle is marvelous, fantastic, beautiful; but it is also terrifying, it is also profoundly sinister. There 
is something in what, for lack of a better word, we must  call the character of great forests -- even in those of 
temperate lands -- which is foreign, appalling, fundamentally and utterly in imical to intruding man. The life of 
those vast masses of swarming vegetation is alien to the human spirit and hostile  to it. Meredith, in his "Woods of 
Westermaine," has tried reassuringly to persuade us th at our terrors are unnecessary, that the hostility of these 
vegetable forces is more apparent than real, and that if we will but trust Nature we shall find our fears transformed 
into serenity, joy, and rapture. This may be sound philosophy in the neighbor hood of Dorking; but it begins to be 
dubious even in the forests of Germany -- there is too mu ch of them for a human being to feel himself at ease 
within their enormous glooms; and when the woods of Borneo are substituted for those of Westermaine, Meredith's 
comforting doctrine becomes frankly ridiculous. 
 It is not the sense of solitude that distresses the wanderer in equatorial jungles. Loneliness is bearable 
enough -- for a time, at any rate. There is something actua lly rather stimulating and exciting about being in an 
empty place where there is no life but one's own. Taken in  reasonably small doses, the Sahara exhilarates, like 
alcohol. Too much of it, however (I speak, at any rate, for myself), has the depressing effect of the second bottle of 
Burgundy. But in any case it is not loneliness that oppresses th e equatorial traveller: it is  too much company; it is 
the uneasy feeling that he is an alien in the midst of  an innumerable throng of hostile beings. To us who live 
beneath a temperate sky and in the age of Henry Ford, the wo rship of Nature comes almost naturally. It is easy to 
love a feeble and already conquered enemy. But an enemy with whom one is still at  war, an unconquered, 
unconquerable, ceaselessly active enemy -- no; one does not, one should not, love him. One respects him, perhaps; 
one has a salutary fear of him; and one goes on fighting. In our latitudes th e hosts of Nature have mostly been 
vanquished and enslaved. Some few detachments, it is true, still hold the field against us. There are wild woods and 
mountains, marshes and heaths, even in England. But they are there only on sufferance, because we have chosen,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

7
out of our good pleasure, to leave them  their freedom. It has not been worth our while to reduce them to slavery. 
We love them because we are the ma sters, because we know that at any moment we can overcome them as we 
overcame their fellows. The inhabitant s of the tropics have no such comfor ting reasons for adoring the sinister 
forces which hem them in on every side. For us, the no tion "river" implies (how obviously!) the notion "bridge." 
When we think of a plain, we think of  agriculture, towns, and good roads. The corollary of mountain is tunnel; of 
swamp, an embankment; of distance, a ra ilway. At latitude zero, however, the obvious is not the same as with us. 
Rivers imply wading, swimming, alligators. Plains mean sw amps, forests, fevers. Mountains are either dangerous 
or impassable. To travel is to hack one's way labori ously through a tangled, prickly, and venomous darkness. "God 
made the country," said Cowper, in hi s rather too blank verse. In New Guin ea he would have ha d his doubts; he 
would have longed for the man-made town. 
 The Wordsworthian adoration of Nature  has two principal defects. The first, as we have seen, is that it is 
only possible in a country where Nature has been nearly or  quite enslaved to man. The second is that it is only 
possible for those who are prepared to falsify their imme diate intuitions of Nature . For Nature, even in the 
temperate zone, is always alien and inhuman, and occasionally diabolic. Meredith explicitly invites us to explain 
any unpleasant experiences away. We ar e to interpret them, Pangloss fash ion, in terms of  a preconceived 
philosophy; after which, all will surely be for the best in the best of all possible Westermaines. Less openly, 
Wordsworth asks us to make the same falsification of im mediate experience. It is only  very occasionally that he 
admits the existence in the world around him of thos e "unknown modes of being" of which our immediate 
intuitions of things make us so disquietingly aware. Normally what he does is to pump the dangerous Unknown out 
of Nature and refill the emptied forms of hills and w oods, flowers and waters, with something more reassuringly 
familiar -- with humanity, with Anglicanism. He will not adm it that a yellow primrose is simply a yellow primrose 
-- beautiful, but essentially strange, having its own alien life apart. He wants it to possess some sort of soul, to exist 
humanly, not simply flowerily. He wants the earth to be more than earthy, to be a divine pers on. But the life of 
vegetation is radically unlike the life of man: the earth has a mode of being that is cert ainly not the mode of being 
of a person. "Let Nature be your teache r," says Wordsworth. The advice is excellent. But how strangely he himself 
puts it into practice! Instead of listening humbly to what th e teacher says, he shuts his ears and himself dictates the 
lesson he desires to hear. The pupil knows better than his master; the wors hipper substitutes his own oracles for 
those of the god. Instead of accepting the lesson as it is  given to his immediate intuitions, he distorts it 
rationalistically into the likeness of a parson's sermon or a professorial lecture.  Our direct intuitions of Nature tell 
us that the world is bottomlessly stra nge: alien, even when it is kind and beautiful; havi ng innumerable modes of 
being that are not our modes; always mysteriously not personal, not conscious, not moral; often hostile and sinister; 
sometimes even unimaginably, because inhumanly, evil. In his youth, it would seem, Word sworth left his direct 
intuitions of the world unwarped. 
 
  The sounding cataract 
 Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock,  
 The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,  
 Their colors and their forms, were then to me  
 An appetite; a feeling and a love,  
 That had no need of a remoter charm,  
 By thought supplied, nor any interest  
 Unborrowed from the eye.  
 
As the years passed, however, he began to interpret them in terms of a pr econceived philosophy. Procrustes-like, 
he tortured his feelings and perceptions until they fitted his system. By the time he was thirty, 
 
  The immeasurable height  
 Of woods decaying, never to be decayed,  
 The stationary blasts of waterfalls --  
 The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky,  
 The rocks that muttered close upon our ears,  
 Black drizzling crags that  spake by the wayside  
 As if a voice were in them, the sick sight  
 And giddy prospect of the raving stream,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

8
 The unfettered clouds and regions of the heavens,  
 Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light --  
 Were all like workings of one mind, the features  
 Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree,  
 Characters of the great Apocalypse,  
 The types and symbols of eternity,  
 Of first, and last, and midst, and without end.  
 
"Something far more deeply interfused" had made its  appearance on the Wordsworthian scene. The god of 
Anglicanism had crept under the skin of things, and a ll the stimulatingly inhuman strangeness of Nature had 
become as flatly familiar as a page from a textbook of metaphysics or theology. As familiar and as safely simple. 
Pantheistically interpreted, our intuitions of Nature's e ndless varieties of impersonal mysteriousness lose all their 
exciting and disturbing qualit y. It makes the world seem delightfully co zy, if you can pretend that all the many 
alien things about you are re ally only manifestations of one person. It  is fear of the labyrinthine flux and 
complexity of phenomena that has driven men to philosophy, to science, to theology -- fear of the complex reality 
driving them to invent a simpler, more manageable, a nd, therefore, consoling fiction. For simple, in comparison 
with the external reality of which we ha ve direct intuitions, childishly simple is even the most elaborate and subtle 
system devised by the human mind. Most of the philosophi cal systems hitherto popular have not been subtle and 
elaborate even by human standards. Even by human sta ndards they have been crude, bald, preposterously 
straightforward. Hence their popularity. Their simplicity has rendered them in stantly comprehensible. Weary with 
much wandering in the maze of phenom ena, frightened by the inhospitable strangeness of the world, men have 
rushed into the systems prepared for them by philosophers and founders of re ligions, as they would rush from a 
dark jungle into the haven of a well-lit, commodious house. W ith a sigh of relief and a thankful feeling that here at 
last is their true home, they settle down in their snug metaphysical villa a nd go to sleep. And how furious they are 
when any one comes rudely knocking at the door to tell th em that their villa is jerr y-built, dilapidated, unfit for 
human habitation, even non-existent! Men ha ve been burnt at the stake for even venturing to criticize the color of 
the front door or the shape of the third-floor windows. 
 That man must build himself some sort of metphysical shelter in the midst of the jungle of immediately 
apprehended reality is obvious. No practical activity, no scientific research, no spec ulation is possible without 
some preliminary hypothesis about the nature and the purpose of things. The human mind cannot deal with the 
universe directly, nor even with its own immediate intuitions of the universe. Whenever it is a question of thinking 
about the world or of practic ally modifying it, men can onl y work on a symbolic plan  of the universe, only a 
simplified, two-dimensional map of things abstracted by the mind out of the complex and multifarious reality of 
immediate intuition. History shows that  these hypotheses about the nature of things are valuable even when, as 
later experience reveals, they are false. Man approach es the unattainable truth th rough a succession of errors. 
Confronted by the strange complexity of things, he inve nts, quite arbitrarily, a simple hypothesis to explain and 
justify the world. Having invented, he proceeds to act an d think in terms of this hypothesis, as though it were 
correct. Experience gradually shows hi m where his hypothesis is unsatisfact ory and how it should be modified. 
Thus, great scientific discove ries have been made by men seeking to ve rify quite erroneous theories about the 
nature of things. The discoveries have necessitated a modification of the original hypotheses, and further 
discoveries have been made in the effort to verify the m odifications -- discoveries which, in their turn, have led to 
yet further modifications. And so on, indefinitely. Philosoph ical and religious hypotheses, being less susceptible of 
experimental verification than the hypotheses of scien ce, have undergone far less modification. For example, the 
pantheistic hypothesis of Wordsworth is an ancient doctrine, which human  experience has hardly modified 
throughout history. And rightly, no doubt. For it is obvious that there must  be some sort of unity underlying the 
diversity of phenomena; for if there were not, the world would be quite unknow able. Indeed, it is precisely in the 
knowableness of things, in the very fact that they  are known, that their fundament al unity consists. The world 
which we know, and which our minds have fabricated  out of goodness knows what mysterious things in 
themselves, possesses the unity which our minds have imposed upon it. It is pa rt of our thought, hence 
fundamentally homogeneous. Yes, the world is obviously one.  But at the same time it is  no less obviously diverse. 
For if the world were absolutely one,  it would no longer be knowable, it w ould cease to exist. Thought must be 
divided against itself before it can co me to any knowledge of itself. Absolu te oneness is absolute nothingness:

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

9
homogeneous perfection, as the Hindus perceived and courag eously recognized, is equiva lent to non-existence, is 
nirvana. The Christian idea of a perfect heaven that is something other than a non-existence is a contradiction in 
terms. The world in which we live may be fundamentally one, but it is a unity divided up into a great many diverse 
fragments. A tree, a table, a newspaper,  a piece of artificial silk are all made of wood. But they are, none the less, 
distinct and separate objects. It is the same with the worl d at large. Our immediate intu itions are of diversity. We 
have only to open our eyes to recognize a multitude of di fferent phenomena. These intuitions of diversity are as 
correct, as well justifie d, as is our intellectual convict ion of the fundamental homogene ity of the various parts of 
the world with one another and with  ourselves. Circumstances have led humanity to set an ever-increasing 
premium on the conscious and intellectual comprehension of things. Modern man's besetting temptation is to 
sacrifice his direct perceptions and spont aneous feelings to his reasoned reflect ions; to prefer in all circumstances 
the verdict of his intellect to that of his immediate intuitions . "L'homme est visiblement fait pour penser," says 
Pascal; "c'est toute sa dignité et tout  son mérite; et tout son devoir est de penser comme il faut." Noble words; but 
do they happen to be true? Pascal seems to forget that ma n has something else to do besides think: he must live. 
Living may not be so dignified or mer itorious as thinking (particularly wh en you happen to be, like Pascal, a 
chronic invalid); but it is, perhaps unfortunately, a neces sary process. If one would live well, one must live 
completely, with the whole being -- with the body and the instincts, as well as with the conscious mind. A life 
lived, as far as may be, exclusively from the consciousness and in accordance with the considered judgments of the 
intellect, is a stunted life, a half-dead life. This is a fact that can be confirmed by daily observation. But 
consciousness, the intellect, the spirit, have acquired an in ordinate prestige; and such is men's snobbish respect for 
authority, such is their pedant ic desire to be consistent, that they go on doing their best to lead the exclusively 
conscious, spiritual, and intellectual life, in spite of its manifest disadvantages. To know is pleasant; it is exciting to 
be conscious; the intelle ct is a valuable instrument, a nd for certain purposes the hypoth eses which it fabricates are 
of great practical value. Quite true. But, therefore, say the moralists and men of scie nce, drawing conclusions only 
justified by their desire for consistency, therefore all life should be lived from the head, consciously, all 
phenomena should at all times be interpreted in terms of the intellect 's hypotheses. The religious teachers are of a 
slightly different opinion. All life, a ccording to them, should be lived spirit ually, not intellectually. Why? On the 
grounds, as we discover when we push our analysis far enough, that certain occas ional psychological states, 
currently called spiritual, are extremely agreeable and have valuable consequences in the realm of social behavior. 
The unprejudiced observer finds it hard to understand why these people should set such store by consistency of 
thought and action. Because oysters are occasionally pleasan t, it does not follow that one should make of oysters 
one's exclusive diet. Nor should one take castor-oil ever y day because castor-oil is occasionally good for one. Too 
much consistency is as bad for the mind as it is for the body. Consistency is contrary to nature, contrary to life. The 
only completely consistent people are the dead. Consistent intellectualism and spirituality may be socially valuable, 
up to a point; but they make, gradually, for individual deat h. And individual death, when the slow murder has been 
consummated, is finally social death. So  that the social utility of pure intellectualism and pure spirituality is only 
apparent and temporary. What is needed is, as ever, a compro mise. Life must be lived in different ways at different 
moments. The only satisfactory way of existing in the modern, highly specialized world is to live with two 
personalities. A Dr. Jekyll that does the metaphysical and scientif ic thinking, that transacts business in the city, 
adds up figures, designs machines, and so forth. And a natural, spontaneous Mr. Hyde to do the physical, 
instinctive living in the intervals of work. The two personalities should lead their unconnected lives apart, without 
poaching on one another's preserves or inquiring too closely into one another' s activities. Only by living discreetly 
and inconsistently can we preserve both the man and th e citizen, both the in tellectual and the sp ontaneous animal 
being, alive within us. The solution may not be very sa tisfactory, but it is, I believe now (though once I thought 
differently), the best that, in the modern circumstances, can be devised. 
 The poet's place, it seems to me, is  with the Mr. Hydes of human nature . He should be, as Blake remarked 
of Milton, "of the devil's party without  knowing it" -- or prefer ably with the full consci ousness of being of the 
devil's party. There are so many intellectual and moral angels battling for rationalism, good citizenship, and pure 
spirituality; so many and such eminent ones, so very vocal  and authoritative! The poor devil in man needs all the 
support and advocacy he can get. The artist is his natural champion. When an artist deserts to the side of the angels, 
it is the most odious of treasons. How unforgivable, for example, is Tolstoy! Tolstoy, the perfect Mr. Hyde, the 
complete embodiment, if ever there was one, of non-in tellectual, non-moral, ins tinctive life -- Tolstoy, who

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

10
betrayed his own nature, betrayed his art,  betrayed life itself, in order to fight against the devil's party of his earlier 
allegiances, under the standard of Dr. Jesus-Jekyll. Wordsw orth's betrayal was not so spectacular: he was never so 
wholly of the devil's party as  Tolstoy. Still, it was bad e nough. It is difficult to forgive him for so utterly repenting 
his youthful passions and ent husiasms, and becoming, persona lly as well as politically , the anglican tory. One 
remembers B. R. Haydon's account of the poet's reactions to that charming classical sculpture of Cupid and Psyche. 
"The devils!" he said malignantly, after a long-drawn contemplation of their marble embrace. "The devils!" And he 
was not using the word in the complimentary sense in wh ich I have employed it here: he was expressing his hatred 
of passion and life, he was damning the young man he had himself been -- the young man who had hailed the 
French Revolution with delight and begotten an illegitimate child. From being an ardent lover of the nymphs, he 
had become one of those all too numerous  
 
  woodmen who expel 
 Love's gentle dryads from the haunts of life,  
 And vex the nightingales in every dell.  
 
Yes, even the nightingales he vexed. Even the nightingales, though the poor birds can never, like those all too 
human dryads, have led him into sexual temptation. Even the innocuous nightingales were moralized, spiritualized, 
turned into citizens and anglicans -- and along with the nightingales, the whole of animate and inanimate Nature. 
 The change in Wordsworth's attitude toward Nature  is symptomatic of his general apostasy. Beginning as 
what I may call a natural aesthete, he transformed himself, in the course of years, into a moralist, a thinker. He used 
his intellect to distort his exquisitely acute and subtle intuitions of  the world, to explain away their often 
disquieting strangeness, to simplify them into a comforta ble metaphysical unreality. Nature had endowed him with 
the poet's gift of seeing more than ordinarily far into  the brick walls of external reality, of intuitively 
comprehending the character of the bricks , of feeling the quality of their being, and establishing the appropriate 
relationship with them. But he preferre d to think his gifts away. He preferre d, in the interests of a preconceived 
religious theory, to ignore th e disquieting strangeness of th ings, to interpret the impersonal diversity of Nature in 
terms of a divine, anglican unity. He chose, in a word, to be a philosopher , comfortably at home with a man-made 
and, therefore, thoroughly comprehensible  system, rather than a poet adventuring for advent ure's sake through the 
mysterious world revealed by his direct and undistorted intuitions. 
 It is a pity that he never traveled beyond the bounda ries of Europe. A voyage through the tropics would 
have cured him of his too easy and comf ortable pantheism. A few months in the jungle would have convinced him 
that the diversity and utter strangeness of Nature are at le ast as real and significant as its intellectually discovered 
unity. Nor would he have felt so certain, in the damp and stifling darkness, among the leeches and the malevolently 
tangled rattans, of the divinely angli can character of that fundamental unity. He would have learned once more to 
treat Nature naturally, as he  treated it in his youth; to  react to it spontaneously, loving where love was the 
appropriate emotion, fearing, hating, fighting whenever Nature presented itself to his intuition as being, not merely 
strange, but hostile, inhumanly evil. A voyage would have taught him this. But Wordswor th never left his native 
continent. Europe is so well gardened that it resembles a work of art, a scientific theory, a neat metaphysical 
system. Man has re-created Europe in  his own image. Its tamed and temper ate Nature confirmed Wordsworth in 
his philosophizings. The poet, the devil's partisan were doomed; the angels triumphed. Alas! 
(From Do What You Will) 
 
 
 
The Olive Tree 
 
 The Tree of Life; the Bodhi Tree ; Yggdrasil and the Burning Bush: 
 
 Populus Alcidae gratissima, vitis Iaccho,  
 formosae myrtus Veneri, sua laurea Phoebo. . .  
 
Everywhere and, before the world was finally laicized, at all times, trees have been worshiped. It is not to be

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

11
wondered at. The tree is an in trinsically "numinous" being. Solidified, a great fountain of life rises in the trunk, 
spreads in the branches, scatters in a spray of leaves and flowers and fruits. With a slow, silent ferocity the roots go 
burrowing down into the earth. Tender, yet irresistible, life  battles with the unliving stones and has the mastery. 
Half hidden in the darkness, half displayed in the air of heaven, the tree stands there,  magnificent, a manifest god. 
Even today we feel its majesty and beau ty -- feel in certain circumstances it s rather fearful quality of otherness, 
strangeness, hostility. Trees in the mass can be almost terri ble. There are devils in the great pine-woods of the 
North, in the swarming equatorial jungl e. Alone in a forest one sometimes becomes aware of the silence -- the 
thick, clotted, living silence of the trees; one realizes one's  isolation in the midst of a vast concourse of alien 
presences. Herne the Hunter was something more than  the ghost of a Windsor gamekeeper. He was probably a 
survival of Jupiter Cernunnus; a lineal descendant of the Cretan Zeus; a wood god who in some of his aspects was 
frightening and even malignant. 
 
 He blasts the tree, and takes the cattle, 
 And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain 
 In a most hideous and dreadful manner.  
 
Even in a royal forest and only twenty miles from London, the serried trees can inspire terror. Alone or in small 
groups, trees are benignly numinous. The a lienness of the forest is so much at tenuated in the park or the orchard 
that it changes its emotional sign and from oppressively  sinister becomes delightful. Tamed and isolated, those 
leaping fountains of non-human life bring only refreshment to spirits parched by the dusty commerce of the world. 
Poetry is full of groves and shrubberies. One thinks of Milton, landscape-gardeni ng in Eden, of Pope, at 
Twickenham. One remembers Coleridge's sycamore and Marv ell's green thought in a green  shade. Chaucer's love 
of trees was so great that he had to compile a whole catalogue in order to express it. 
 
 But, Lorde, so I was glad and wel begoon! 
 For over al, where I myn eyen caste, 
 Weren trees, claad with levys that ay shal laste, 
 Eche in his kynde, with colors fressh and grene 
 As emerawde, that joy was for to sene. 
 The bylder oke, and eke the hardy asshe, 
 The peler (pillar )elme, the cofre unto careyne, 
 The box pipe tree, holme to whippes lasshe, 
 The saylynge firre, the cipresse deth to pleyne, 
 The sheter (shooter) ewe, the aspe for shaftes pleyne, 
 The olyve of pes, and eke the drunken vyne 
 The victor palme, the laurere, to, devyne.  
 
I like them all, but especially the olive. For what it sym bolizes, first of all -- peace with  its leaves and joy with its 
golden oil. True, the crown of olive was originally worn  by Roman conquerors at ovatio n; the peace it proclaimed 
was the peace of victory, the peace which is too often onl y the tranquillity of exhaustion or complete annihilation. 
Rome and its customs have passed, and we remember of  the olive only the fact that it stood for peace, not the 
circumstances in which it did so. 
 
 Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd,  
 And peace proclaims olives of endless age.  
 
We are a long way from the imperator riding in triumph through the streets of Rome. 
 The association of olive leaves w ith peace is like the association of the number seven with good luck, or the 
color green with hope. It is an arbitrary and, so to say, me taphysical association. That is why it has survived in the 
popular imagination down to the pres ent day. Even in countries where the olive tree does not grow, men 
understand what is meant by "the olive branch" and can recognize, in a political ca rtoon, its pointed leaves. The 
association of olive o il with joy has a pragmatic reason. Applied exte rnally, oil was supposed to have medicinal 
properties. In the ancient world those who could afford  it were in the habit of oiling themselves at every 
opportunity. A shiny and well lubricated face was thought to be beautiful; it wa s also a sign of prosperity. To the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

12
ancient Mediterranean peoples  the association of oil with joy seemed  inevitable and obvious. Our habits are not 
those of the Romans, Greeks and Hebrews. What to them wa s "natural" is today hardly even imaginable. Patterns 
of behavior change, and ideas which are associated in virt ue of the pattern existing at  a given moment  of history 
will cease to be associated when that pattern exists no more . But ideas which are associated arbitrarily, in virtue of 
some principle, or some absence of pr inciple, unconnected with current behavi or patterns, will remain associated 
through changing circumstances. One must  be something of an archeologist to remember the old and once 
thoroughly reasonable association between olive oil and joy;  the equally old, but quite unreasonable and arbitrary 
association between olive leaves and peace has survived intact into the machine age. 
 It is surprising, I often thi nk, that our Protestant biblio laters should have paid so little attention to the oil 
which played such an important part in the daily lives of the ancient Hebrews. All that was greasy possessed for the 
Jews a profound religious, social and se nsuous significance. Oil was used for anointing kings, priests and sacred 
edifices. On festal days men's cheeks and noses fairly shone with it; a ma tt-surfaced face was a sign of mourning. 
Then there were the animal fats. Fat meat was always a particularly welcome sacrifice. Unlike the modern child, 
Jehovah reveled in mutton fat. His worshipers shared this taste. "Eat ye that which is good," advises Isaiah, "and let 
your soul delight itself in fatness." As for the prosperously wicked, "they have  more than their heart can wish" and 
the proof of it is that "their eyes st and out with fatness." The world of the Old Testament, it is evident, was one 
where fats were scarce and correspondingl y esteemed. One of our chief sources of edible fat, the pig, was taboo to 
the Israelites. Butter and lard depend on a supply of grass long enough for cows to get their tongues round. But the 
pastures of Palestine are thin, short and precarious. Cows there had no milk to spare, and oxen were too valuable as 
draught animals to be used for suet. Only the sheep a nd the olive remained as sources of that physiologically 
necessary and therefore delicious fatness in which the Hebrew soul took such delight. How intense that delight was 
is proved by the way in which the Psalmist describes his religious experiences. "B ecause thy loving kindness is 
better than life, my lips shall praise th ee. . . My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth 
shall praise thee with joyful lips." In  this age of Danish bacon and unlimite d margarine it would never occur to a 
religious writer to liken the mystical ecstasy to a good guzzle at the Savoy. If he wanted to describe it in terms of a 
sensuous experience, he would proba bly choose a sexual metaphor. Square meals are now too common to be 
ranked as epoch-making treats. 
 The "olyve of pes" is, then, a symbol and I love it for what it stands for. I l ove it also for what it is in itself, 
aesthetically; for what it is in relation to the Mediterranean landscape in which it beautifully plays its part. 
 The English are Germans who have partially " gone Latin." But for William the Conqueror and the 
Angevins we should be just another nation of Teutons, speaking some uninteresting di alect of Dutch or Danish. 
The Normans gave us the English language, that beauti fully compounded mixture of French and Saxon; and the 
English language molded the English mind. By Latin out of German: such is our pe digree. We are essentially 
mongrels: that is the whole point of us. To be mongrels is our mission. If we  would fulfill this mission adequately 
we must take pains to cultivate our mongrelism. Our Saxon and Celtic flesh requires to be constantly rewedded to 
the Latin spirit. For the most part th e English have always realized this truth and acted upon it. From the time of 
Chaucer onwards almost all our writers have turned, by a kind of infallible  instinct, like swallows, toward the 
South -- toward the phantoms of Greece and Rome, toward the living realities of France and Italy. On the rare 
occasions when, losing their orientation, they have turned eastward and northward, the results have been 
deplorable. The works of Carlyle are there, an awful warning, to remind us  of what happens when the English 
forget that their duty is to be mongrels and go whoring, within the bounds of consanguinity, after German gods. 
 The olive tree is an emblem of the Latinity toward wh ich our migrant's instinct commands us perpetually to 
turn. As well as for peace and for joy, it stands for all th at makes us specifically Englis h rather than Teutonic; for 
those Mediterranean influences without which Chaucer and Shakespeare could never have become what they 
learned from France and Italy, from Rome and Greece, to be -- the most es sentially native of our poets. The olive 
tree is, so to speak, the complement of the oak; and the bright hard-edged landscapes in which it figures are the 
necessary correctives of those gauzy and indeterminate lovelinesses of the English scene. Under a polished sky the 
olives state their aesthetic ca se without the qualifications of mist, of shifting lights, of atmospheric perspective, 
which give to English landscapes their subtle and melanchol y beauty. A perfect beauty in  its way; but, as of all 
good things, one can have too much of it. The British Consti tution is a most admirable i nvention; but it is good to 
come back occasionally to fixed first principles and the firm outline of syllogistic argument.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

13
 With clarity and definition is associated a certain phys ical spareness. Most of the great deciduous trees of 
England give one the impression, at any rate in summer, of being rather obes e. In Scandinavian mythology Embla, 
the elm, was the first woman. Those who have lived much  with old elm trees -- a nd I spent a good part of my 
boyhood under their ponderous shade --  will agree that the Scandinavians were  men of insight. Th ere is in effect 
something blowsily female about those vast trees that brood with all their bulging masses of foliage above the 
meadows of the home counties. In winter  they are giant sk eletons; and for a moment in the early spring a cloud of 
transparent emerald vapor floats in the air; but by June they have settled down to an enormous middle age. 
 By comparison the olive tree seems an athlete in training. It sits lightly on  the earth and its foliage is never 
completely opaque. There is always air between the thin grey  and silver leaves of the olive, always the flash of 
light within its shadows. By the end of summer the foliage of our northern trees is a great  clot of dark unmitigated 
green. In the olive the lump is always leavened. 
 The landscape of the equator is, as the traveler discovers to his no small surprise, singularly like the 
landscape of the more luxuriant parts of southern Engl and. He finds the same thick woods and, where man has 
cleared them, the same park-like expanses of luscious greenery. The whole is illumined by the same cloudy sky, 
alternately bright and dark, and wetted by precisely thos e showers of hot water whic h render yet more oppressive 
the sultriness of July days in the Thames valley or in De vonshire. The equator is England in summer, but raised, so 
to speak, to a higher power. Falmouth cubed equals Singa pore. Between the equatorial and the temperate zone lies 
a belt of drought; even Provence is half a desert. The equator is dank, the tropics and the sub-tropics are 
predominantly dry. The Sahara and Arabia, the wastes of India and Central Asia and North America are a girdle 
round the earth of sand and naked rock. The Mediterranean lies  on the fringes of this dese rt belt and the olive is its 
tree -- the tree of a region of sun-lit clarity separating the damps of the equator from th e damps of the North. It is 
the symbol of a classicism enclosed between two romanticisms. 
 "And where," Sir George Beaumont inquired of Cons table, "where do you put your brown tree?" The reply 
was disquieting: the eccentric fellow didn't put it anywhere. There are no br own trees in Constable's landscapes. 
Breaking the tradition of more than a century, he boldly insisted on painting his trees bright green. Sir George, who 
had been brought up to think of English landscape in te rms of raw Sienna and ochr e, was bewildered. So was 
Chantrey. His criticism of Constable' s style took a practical form. When "Hadleigh Castle" was sent to the 
Academy he took a pot of bitumen and glazed the whole fo reground with a coat of rich brown. Constable had to 
spend several hours patiently scratching it off again. To paint a bright green tree and make a successful picture of it 
requires genius of no uncommon order.  Nature is embarrassingly brilliant  and variegated; only the greatest 
colorists know how to deal with such a shining profusion. Doubtful of their powers, the more  cautious prefer to 
transpose reality into anot her and simpler key. The key of brown, for example. The England of the eighteenth-
century painters is chronically autumnal. 
 At all seasons of the year the oliv e achieves that sober neutrality of tone which the deciduous trees of the 
North put on only in autumn and winter. "Where do you pu t your gray tree?" If you ar e painting in Provence, or 
Tuscany, you put it everywhere. At every season of the year  the landscape is full of gray trees. The olive is 
essentially a painter's tree. It does not need to be trans posed into another key, and it can be rendered completely in 
terms of pigment that are as old as the art of painting. 
 Large expanses of the Mediterran ean scene are by Nature herself c onceived and executed in the earth 
colors. Your gray tree and its back ground of bare bone-like hills, red-brown earth and the all but black cypresses 
and pines are within the range of the most ascetic palette. Derain can rende r Provence with half a dozen tubes of 
color. How instructive to compare his o lives with those of Renoir! White, black, terra verde -- Derain's rendering 
of the gray tree is complete. But it is not the only co mplete rendering. Renoir was a man with a passion for bright 
gay colors. To this passion he added an  extraordinary virtuosity in combining them. It was not in his nature to be 
content with a black, white and earth-green olive. His gr ay trees have shadows of ca dmium green, and where they 
look toward the sun, are suffused with a glow of pink. No w, no olive has ever shown a trace of any color warmer 
than the faint ochre of withering leaves and summer dusts. Nevertheless these pink trees, which in Renoir's 
paintings of Cagnes recall the exuberant girls of his latest, rosiest manner, are somehow quite startlingly like the 
cold gray olives which they apparently misrepresent. The rendering, so different from Derain's, is equally complete 
and satisfying. 
 If I could paint and had the necessa ry time, I should devote myself for a few years to making pictures only

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

14
of olive trees. What a wealth of variations upon a single them e! Above Pietrasanta, for ex ample, the first slopes of 
the Apuan Alps rise steeply from the pl ain in a series of terraces  built up, step after step, by generations of patient 
cultivators. The risers of this great staircase are retaining walls of unmortare d limestone; the trea ds, of grass. And 
on every terrace grow the olives. They are ancient trees; thei r boles are gnarled, their branches strangely elbowed. 
Between the sharp narrow leaves one sees the sky; and be neath them in the thin sof tly tempered light there are 
sheep grazing. Far off, on a level with the eye, lies the sea. There is one picture, one series of pictures. 
 But olives will grow on the plai n as well as on the hillside. Between  Seville and Cordoba the rolling 
country is covered with what is almost a forest of olive trees. It is a woodland scene. Elsewh ere they are planted 
more sparsely. I think, for example, of that plain at the f oot of the Maures in Provence.  In spring, beside the road 
from Toulon to Fréjus, the ploughed ear th is a rich Pozzuoli re d. Above it hang the olives, gray, with soft black 
shadows and their highest leav es flashing white against the sky; and, betw een the olives, peach trees in blossom -- 
burning bushes of shell-pink flame in vi olent and irreconcilable conflict with  the red earth. A problem, there, for 
the most accomplished painter. 
 In sunlight Renoir saw a flash of madder breaking out of the gray foliage. Under a clouded sky, with rain 
impending, the olives glitter with an equal but very different intensity. There is no warmth in them now; the leaves 
shine white, as though illumined from within by a kind of  lunar radiance. The soft black of the shadows is 
deepened to the extreme of night. In every tree ther e is simultaneously moonlight and darkness. Under the 
approaching storm the olives take on another kind of being; they become more conspicuous in the landscape, more 
significant. Of what? Significant of what? But to that question, when we ask it, nature always stubbornly refuses to 
return a clear reply. At the sight of those mysterious lunar trees, at once so dark and so brilliant beneath the clouds, 
we ask, as Zechariah asked of the angel: "What are these two olive trees upon the right si de of the candlestick and 
upon the left side thereof? What be these two olive bran ches which through the two golden pipes empty the golden 
oil out of themselves? And he answer ed me and said, Knowest thou not what  these be? And I said, No, my lord. 
Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole eart h." And that, I imagine, is 
about as explicit and comprehensible an answer as our Wordsworthian questionings are ever likely to receive. 
 Provence is a painter's paradise, and its tree, the olive,  the painter's own tree. But there are disquieting signs 
of change. During the last few years there has been a steady destruction of olive orchards. Magnificent old trees are 
being cut, their wood sold for firing and the land they o ccupied planted with vines. Fifty years from now, it may 
be, the olive tree will almost have disa ppeared from southern France, and Pr ovence will wear a nother aspect. It 
may be, I repeat; it is not certain. No thing is certain nowadays except cha nge. Even the majestic stability of 
agriculture has been shaken by the progress of technology. Thirty years ago, for example, the farmers of the Rhône 
valley grew rich on silkworms. Then came the invention of  viscose. The caterpillars tried to compete with the 
machines and failed. The female form is now swathed in wood-pulp, and between Lyons and Avignon the 
mulberry tree and its attendant worm are all but extinct. Vines were next planted. But North Africa was also 
planting vines. In a year of plenty vin ordinaire fetches about a penny a quart. The vines have been rooted up 
again, and today the prosperity of the Rhône valley de pends on peach trees. A few years from now, no doubt, the 
Germans will be making synthetic peaches out of sawdust or coal tar. And then -- what? 
 The enemy of the olive tree is the peanut. Arachis hypogaea grows like a weed all ove r the tropics and its 
seeds are fifty per cent pure oil. The olive is slow-growing, capricious in its  yield, requires much pruning, and the 
fruit must be hand picked. Peanut oil is half the price of olive oil. The Italians, who wish to keep their olive trees, 
have almost forbidden the use of peanut oil. The French, on the other hand, ar e the greatest importers of peanuts in 
Europe. Most of the oil they make is  re-exported; but enough rema ins in France to imperil the olives of Provence. 
Will they go the way of the mulberry trees? Or will some new invention come rushing up in the nick of time with a 
reprieve? It seems that, suitably treated, olive oil makes an excellent lubricant, ca pable of standing up to high 
temperatures. Thirty years from now, mineral lubricants will be growing scarce. Along with the castor-oil plant, the 
olive tree may come again triumphantly into its own. Perhaps. Or perhaps not. The future of Provençal landscape is 
in the hands of the chemists. It is in their power to preserve it as it is, or to alter it out of all recognition. 
 It would not be the first time in the course of its history that the landscape of Provence has changed its face. 
The Provence that we know -- terraced vineyard and olive orchard alternating with pine-woods and those deserts of 
limestone and prickly bushes which are locally called garrigues -- is profoundly unlike the Provence of Roman and 
medieval times. It was a land, then, of great forests. The hills were covered with a splendid growth of ilex trees and

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

15
Aleppo pines. The surviving Forêt du Dom allows us to guess what these woods -- th e last outposts toward the 
south of the forests of the temperate zone -- were like. Today the garrigues, those end products of a long 
degeneration, have taken their place. Th e story of Provençal vegetation is a de cline and fall, that begins with the 
ilex wood and ends with the garrigue. 
 The process of destruction is a familiar one. The tree s were cut for firewood and shipbuilding. (The naval 
arsenal at Toulon devoured the forest for miles around.) The glass industry at e its way from the plain into the 
mountains, carrying with it irreparabl e destruction. Meanwhile, the farmers and the shepherds were busy, cutting 
into the woods in search of more land for the plough, burning  them in order to have more pasture for their beasts. 
The young trees sprouted again -- only to be eaten by the sheep and goats. In the end they gave up the struggle and 
what had been forest turned at last to a blasted heath. The long process of degradation ends in  the garrigue. And 
even this blasted heath is not quite the end. Beyond the true garrigue, with  its cistus, its broom, its prickly dwarf 
oak, there lie a series of false garr igues, vegetably speaking worse than the true. On  purpose or by accident, 
somebody sets fire to the scrub. In the following spri ng the new shoots are eaten down to the ground. A coarse 
grass -- baouco in Provençal -- is all that manages to spri ng up. The shepherd is happy; his beasts can feed, as they 
could not do on the garrigue. But sheep and goats are ravenous. The new pasture is soon overgrazed. The baouco is 
torn up by the roots and disappears, giving place to fero cious blue thistles and the poisonous asphodel. With the 
asphodel the process is complete. Degrad ation can go no further. The asphodel is  sheep-proof and even, thanks to 
its deeply planted tubers, fi re-proof. And it allows very little else to  grow in its neighbor hood. If protected long 
enough from fire and animals, the garrigue will gradually build itself up again into a forest. But a desert of 
asphodels obstinately remains itself. 
 Efforts are now being made to reafforest the blaste d heaths of Provence. In an age of cigarette-smoking 
tourists the task is diffi cult and the interruptions by fire frequent  and disheartening. One can hardly doubt, 
however, of the ultimate success of the undertaking. The chemists may spare the olive trees; and yet the face of 
Provence may still be changed. For the proper background to th e olive trees is the thinly  fledged limestone of the 
hills -- pinkish and white and pale blue in the distance, lik e Cézanne's Mont Sainte Victoire. Reforested, these hills 
will be almost black with ilex and pine. Half the painter's paradise will have gone, if the desert is brought back to 
life. With the cutting of the olive trees the other half will follow. 
(From The Olive Tree) 
 
 
 
The Desert 
 
 Boundlessness and emptiness -- these are the two most e xpressive symbols of that attributeless Godhead, of 
whom all that can be said is St. Bernard's Nescio nescio or the Vedantist's "not this, not this." The Godhead, says 
Meister Eckhart, must be loved "as not-God, not-Spirit, not-person, not-image, must be loved as He is, a sheer pure 
absolute One, sundered from all twoness, and in whom we must eternally sink from  nothingness to nothingness." 
In the scriptures of Northern a nd Far Eastern Buddhism the spatial me taphors recur again and again. At the 
moment of death, writes the author of Bardo Thodol, "all things are lik e the cloudless sky; and the naked 
immaculate Intellect is like unto a tran slucent void without circumference or center." "The great Way," in Sosan's 
words, "is perfect, like unto vast space, with nothing wa nting, nothing superfluous." "Mind," says Hui-neng (and 
he is speaking of that universal gro und of consciousness, from which all bei ngs, the unenlightened no less than the 
enlightened, take their source), "mind is like emptiness of space. . . Space contains sun, moon, stars, the great earth, 
with its mountains and rivers. . . Good men and bad men, good things and bad things, heaven and hell -- they are 
all in empty space. The emptiness of Self-nature is in  all people just like this." The theologians argue, the 
dogmatists declaim their credos; but their propositions "stand  in no intrinsic relation to my inner light. This Inner 
Light" (I quote from Yoka Dashi's "Song of Enlightenment") "can be likened to space; it knows no boundaries; yet 
it is always here, is always with us, al ways retains its serenity and fullness. . . You cannot take hold of it, and you 
cannot get rid of it; it goes on its own way. You speak and it is silent; you remain silent, and it speaks." 
 Silence is the cloudless heaven perceived by another se nse. Like space and emptiness, it is a natural symbol 
of the divine. In the Mithraic mysteries, the candidate for initiation was told to lay a finger to his lips and whisper:

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

16
"Silence! Silence! Silence -- symbol of the living imperish able God!" And long before th e coming of Christianity 
to the Thebaid, there had been Egyptian mystery religions, for whose followers God was a well of life, "closed to 
him who speaks, but open to the silent." The Hebrew scri ptures are eloquent almost to excess; but even here, 
among the splendid rumblings of prophetic praise and impetration and anathema, there are occasional references to 
the spiritual meaning and the therapeutic virtues of silence. "Be still, and know that I am God." "The Lord is in his 
holy temple; let all the world keep sile nce before him." "Keep thou silence at  the presence of the Lord God." The 
desert, after all, began within a few miles of the gates of Jerusalem. 
 The facts of silence and emptiness are traditionally the symbols of divi ne immanence -- but not, of course, 
for everyone, and not in all circumstances. "Until one has crossed a barren desert, w ithout food or water, under a 
burning tropical sun, at three miles an hour, one can form no conception of what misery is." These are the words of 
a gold-seeker, who took the southern route to California in  1849. Even when one is crossing it at seventy miles an 
hour on a four-lane highway, the desert can seem formidab le enough. To the forty-niners it was unmitigated hell. 
Men and women who are at her mercy find it hard to see in  Nature and her works any symbols but those of brute 
power at the best and, at the worst, of an obscure an d mindless malice. The desert's emptiness and the desert's 
silence reveal what we may call their spiritual meanings only to those w ho enjoy some measure of physiological 
security. The security may amount to no more than St. An thony's hut and daily ration of  bread and vegetables, no 
more than Milarepa's cave and barley meal and boiled nettles -- less than what any sane economist would regard as 
the indispensable minimum, but still security, still a guarantee of organic life and, along with life, of the possibility 
of spiritual liberty and transcendental happiness. 
 But even for those who enjoy security against the assaul ts of the environment, the desert does not always or 
inevitably reveal its spiritual meanings. The early Christian hermits retired to the Thebaid because its air was purer, 
because there were fewer distractions, because God seemed nearer there than in the world of men. But, alas, dry 
places are notoriously the abode  of unclean spirits, seeking rest and find ing it not. If the immanence of God was 
sometimes more easily discoverable in the desert, so also, and all too frequently, was th e immanence of the devil. 
St. Anthony's temptations have become a legend, and Cassian  speaks of "the tempests of imagination" through 
which every newcomer to the eremitic life had to pass. Solitude, he writes, makes men feel "the many-winged folly 
of their souls. . .; they find the perp etual silence intolerable, and those whom no labor on the land could weary, are 
vanquished by doing nothing and worn out by the long duration of their peace." Be still, and know that I am God; 
be still, and know that you are the delinquent imbecile who snarls and gibbers in the basement of every human 
mind. The desert can drive men mad, but it can also help them to become supremely sane. 
 The enormous drafts of emptiness and silence prescr ibed by the eremites are safe medicine only for a few 
exceptional souls. By the majority the desert should be take n either dilute or, if at full strength, in small doses. 
Used in this way, it acts as a spiritual restorative, as an anti-hallucinant, as a de-tensioner and alterative. 
 In his book, The Next Million Years, Sir Charles Darwin looks forward to  thirty thousand generations of 
ever more humans pressing ever more heavily on ever dw indling resources and being ki lled off in ever increasing 
numbers by famine, pestilence and war. He may be right. Alternatively, human ingenuity may somehow falsify his 
predictions. But even human ingenuity will find it hard to circumvent arithmetic. On a planet of limited area, the 
more people there are, the less vacant space there is bound to be. Over and above the material and sociological 
problems of increasing population, there is a serious  psychological problem. In a completely home-made 
environment, such as is provided by any great metropolis, it is as hard to remain sane as it is in a completely 
natural environment such as the desert or the forest. O Solitude, where are thy charms? But, O Multitude, where 
are thine! The most wonderful thing about Amer ica is that, even in these middle years of the twentieth century, 
there are so few Americans. By taking a certain amount of trouble you might still be able to get yourself eaten by a 
bear in the state of New York. And without any trouble at  all you can get bitten by a rattler in the Hollywood hills, 
or die of thirst, while wandering through an uninhabited desert, within a hundred and fifty miles of Los Angeles. A 
short generation ago you might have wandered and died w ithin only a hundred miles of Los Angeles. Today the 
mounting tide of humanity has oozed  through the intervening canyons and spilled out into the wide Mojave. 
Solitude is receding at the rate of four and a half kilometers per annum. 
 And yet, in spite of it all, the s ilence persists. For this si lence of the desert is su ch that casual sounds, and 
even the systematic noise of civilizati on, cannot abolish it. They coexist with it  -- as small irrelevances at right 
angles to an enormous meaning, as veins of something analogous to darkness within  an enduring transparency.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

17
From the irrigated land come the da rk gross sounds of lowing cattle, and above them the plovers trail their 
vanishing threads of shrillness. Suddenly, startlingly, out of the sleeping sagebrush there bursts the shrieking of 
coyotes -- Trio for Ghoul and Two Damned Souls. On  the trunks of cottonwood trees, on the wooden walls of 
barns and houses, the woodpeckers rattle away like pneuma tic drills. Picking one's way between the cactuses and 
the creosote bushes one hears, like some tiny whirring cloc kwork, the soliloquies of invisible wrens, the calling, at 
dusk, of the nightjays and even occasiona lly the voice of Homo sapiens -- six of  the species in a parked Chevrolet, 
listening to the broadcast of a prize fi ght, or else in pairs necking to the delicious accompaniment of Crosby. But 
the light forgives, the distances forget, and this great crystal of silence, whose base is as large as Europe and whose 
height, for all practical purposes, is infinite, can coexist with things of a far higher order of discrepancy than 
canned sentiment or vicarious sport. Jet planes, for example -- the stillness is so massive that it can absorb even jet 
planes. The screaming crash mounts to its intolerable climax and fades agai n, mounts as another of the monsters 
rips through the air, and once more diminishes and is gone. But even at the height of the outrage the mind can still 
remain aware of that which surrounds it, that which preceded and will outlast it. 
 Progress, however, is on the march. Je t planes are already as characteristic  of the desert as are Joshua trees 
or burrowing owls; they will soon be almost as numerous . The wilderness has entered the armament race, and will 
be in it to the end. In its multi-m illion-acred emptiness there is room enough to explode atomic bombs and 
experiment with guided missiles. The weather, so far as  flying is concerned, is unif ormly excellent, and in the 
plains lie the flat beds of many lakes, dry since the last Ice Age, and manifestly intended by Providence for hot-rod 
racing and jets. Huge airfie lds have already been constructed. Fact ories are going up. Oases are turning into 
industrial towns. In brand-new Reservations, surrounded by barbed wire and the FBI, not Indians but tribes of 
physicists, chemists, metallurgists, communication engineers and mechanics are working with the co-ordinated 
frenzy of termites. From their air-conditioned laborator ies and machine shops there flows a steady stream of 
marvels, each one more expensive and each more fiendish than the last. The desert silence is still there; but so, ever 
more noisily, are the scientific irrele vancies. Give the boys in the reserv ations a few more years and another 
hundred billion dollars, and they will succeed (for with technology all things are possible) in abolishing the silence, 
in transforming what are now irrelevancies into the desert's fundamental meaning. Meanwhile, and luckily for us, it 
is noise which is exceptional; the rule is still this crystalline symbol of universal Mind. 
 The bulldozers roar, the concrete is  mixed and poured, the jet planes go crashing through the air, the rockets 
soar aloft with their cargoes of white mice and electronic instruments. And yet for all this, "nature is never spent; 
there lives the dearest freshness deep down things." 
 And not merely the dearest, but the strangest, the most wonderfully unlikely. I remember, for example, a 
recent visit to one of the new Reservations. It was in th e spring of 1952 and, after seven years of drought, the rains 
of the preceding winter had b een copious. From end to en d the Mojave was carpeted with flowers -- sunflowers, 
and the dwarf phlox, chicory and coreopsis , wild hollyhock and all the tribe of garlics and lilies. And then, as we 
neared the Reservation, the fl ower carpet began to move. We  stopped the car, we walked into the desert to take a 
closer look. On the bare ground, on every plant and bush innumerable caterpillars were crawling. They were of two 
kinds -- one smooth, with green and white markings, and a horn, like that of a miniature rhinoceros, growing out of 
its hinder end. The caterpillar, evidentl y, of one of the hawk moths. Mingled  with these, in millions no less 
uncountable, were the brown hairy offspri ng of (I think) the Painted Lady butte rfly. They were everywhere -- over 
hundreds of square miles of the desert. And yet, a year before, when the eggs from which these larvae had emerged 
were laid, California had been as dry as a bone. On what, then, had the parent insects lived? And what had been the 
food of their innumerable offspring? In the days when I collected butterflies and kept their young in glass jars on 
the window sill of my cubicle at school , no self-respecting caterpillar would f eed on anything but the leaves to 
which its species had been predestined. Puss moths laid th eir eggs on poplars, spurge  hawks on spurges; mulleins 
were frequented by the gaily piebald caterpillars of one rather rare and rigidly fastidious moth. Offered an 
alternative diet, my caterpillars would turn away in horro r. They were like orthodox Jews confronted by pork or 
lobsters; they were like Brahmins at a feast of beef prepared by Untouchables. Eat? Never. They would rather die. 
And if the right food were not forthcom ing, die they did. But these caterpill ars of the desert were apparently 
different. Crawling into irrigated re gions, they had devoured the young leaves  of entire vineyards and vegetable 
gardens. They had broken with tradition, they had flouted the immemorial taboos. Here, near the Reservation, there 
was no cultivated land. These hawk moth and Painted Lady cat erpillars, which were all full grown, must have fed

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

18
on indigenous growths -- but which, I c ould never discover; for when I saw them the creatures were all crawling at 
random, in search either of something juicier to eat or else of some place to spin their cocoons. Entering the 
Reservation, we found them all over the parking lot and even on the steps of the en ormous building which housed 
the laboratories and the administrati ve offices. The men on guard only laughed or swore. But could they be 
absolutely sure? Biology has always been the Russians' stronge st point. These innumerable crawlers -- perhaps 
they were Soviet agents? Parachut ed from the stratosphere, impenetr ably disguised, and so thoroughly 
indoctrinated, so completely conditioned by means of post-hypnotic suggestions that even under torture it would be 
impossible for them to confess, even under DDT. . . 
 Our party showed its pass and entered. The strangene ss was no longer Nature's; it was strictly human. Nine 
and a half acres of floor space, nine and a half acres of  the most extravagant improbability. Sagebrush and wild 
flowers beyond the windows; but here, within, machine tools capab le of turning out anyt hing from a tank to an 
electron microscope; million-volt X-ray cameras; electric furnaces; wind tunnels; refrigerated vacuum tanks; and 
on either side of endless pa ssages closed doors bearing inscriptions which had obvious ly been taken from last 
year's science fiction magazines. (This year's space ships,  of course, have harnessed gravitation and magnetism.) 
ROCKET DEPARTMENT,  we read on door after door. ROCKET AND EXPLOSIVES DEPARTMENT,  
ROCKET PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT. And what lay behind the unmar ked doors? Rockets and Canned 
Tularemia? Rockets and Nuclear Fission? Rockets and Spac e Cadets? Rockets and Elementary Courses in Martian 
Language and Literature? 
 It was a relief to get back to the caterpillars. Nine ty-nine point nine recurring pe r cent of the poor things 
were going to die -- but not for an ideology, not while doing their best to bring death to other caterpillars, not to the 
accompaniment of Te Deums, of Dulce et decorums, of "We shall not sheathe the sword, which we have not lightly 
drawn, until. . ." Until what? The only completely unc onditional surrender will come when everybody -- but 
everybody -- is a corpse. 
 For modern man, the really blessed thing about Nature is its otherness. In their anxiety to find a cosmic 
basis for human values, our ancestors invented an emblematic botany, a natural history composed of allegories and 
fables, an astronomy that told fortunes and illustrated the dogmas of revealed religion. "In the Middle Ages," writes 
Émile Mâle, "the idea of a thing which a man formed for himself, was always more real than the thing itself. . . The 
study of things for their own sake held no meaning for the thoughtful man. . . The task for the student of nature was 
to discover the eternal truth which God would have each th ing express." These eternal truths expressed by things 
were not the laws of physical and or ganic being -- laws discoverable only by patient observation and the sacrifice 
of preconceived ideas and autistic urges; they were the notions and fantas ies engendered in the minds of logicians, 
whose major premises, for the most part, were other fant asies and notions bequeathed to  them by earlier writers. 
Against the belief that such purely verb al constructions were eternal truths , only the mystics protested; and the 
mystics were concerned only with that "obscure knowledge," as it was called, which comes when a man "sees all in 
all." But between the real but obscure knowledge of the mystic and the clear but unreal knowledge of the verbalist, 
lies the clearish and realish knowledge of the naturalist and the man of science. It was knowledge of a kind which 
most of our ancestors found completely uninteresting. 
 Reading the older descriptions of God's creatures, th e older speculations about the ways and workings of 
Nature, we start by being amused. But the amusement soon turns to the most intense boredom and a kind of mental 
suffocation. We find ourselves gasping for breath in a worl d where all the windows are shut and everything "wears 
man's smudge and shares man's smell." Words are the grea test, the most momentous of all our inventions, and the 
specifically human realm is the realm of  language. In the stifling universe of medieval thought, the given facts of 
Nature were treated as the symbols of familiar notions. Words did not stand for things; things stood for pre-existent 
words. This is a pitfall which, in the natural sciences, we  have learned to avoid. But in other contexts than the 
scientific -- in the context, for exam ple, of politics -- we c ontinue to take our verbal  symbols with the same 
disastrous seriousness as was displayed by our crusading and persecuting ancestors. For both parties, the people on 
the other side of the Iron Curtain are not human beings , but merely the embodiments of the pejorative phrases 
coined by propagandists. 
 Nature is blessedly non-human; and insofar as we belong to the natural order, we too are blessedly non-
human. The otherness of caterpillars, as of our own bodies , is an otherness underlain by a principal identity. The 
non-humanity of wild flowers, as of th e deepest levels of our own minds, ex ists within a system which includes

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

19
and transcends the human. In the give n realm of the inner and outer not-se lf, we are all one. In the home-made 
realm of symbols we are separate and mutually hostile partisans. Thanks to words, we have been able to rise above 
the brutes; and thanks to words, we have often sunk to the level of the demons. Our statesmen have tried to come to 
an international agreement on the use of atomic power. They  have not been successful. And even if they had, what 
then? No agreement on atomic power can do any lastin g good, unless it be preceded by an agreement on language. 
If we make a wrong use of nuclear fission, it will be because we have made a wrong use of the symbols, in terms of 
which we think about ourselves and other people. Individua lly and collectively, men have  always been the victims 
of their own words; but, except in the emotionally neutral field of science, they have never been willing to admit 
their linguistic ineptitude, and correct their mistakes. Taken too seriously, symbols have motivated and justified all 
the horrors of recorded history. On every level from th e personal to the international, the letter kills. Theoretically 
we know this very well. In practice, nevertheless, we continue to commit th e suicidal blunders to which we have 
become accustomed. 
 The caterpillars were still on the march when we left the Reservation, and it was half an hour or more, at a 
mile a minute, before we were clear of them. Among th e phloxes and the sunflowers, millions in the midst of 
hundreds of millions, they proclaimed (along with the dang ers of over-population) the st rength, the fecundity, the 
endless resourcefulness of life.  We were in the desert, and the desert was blossomi ng, the desert was crawling. I 
had not seen anything like it since th at spring day, in 1948, when we had been  walking at the other end of the 
Mojave, near the great eart hquake fault, down which the highway desce nds to San Bernardino and the orange 
groves. The elevation here is  around four thousand feet a nd the desert is dotted with dark clumps of juniper. 
Suddenly, as we moved through the enormous emptiness, we became aware of an en tirely unfamiliar interruption 
to the silence. Before, behind, to right and to left, the s ound seemed to come from a ll directions. It was a small 
sharp crackling, like the ubiqui tous frying of bacon, like the first flames  in the kindling of innumerable bonfires. 
There seemed to be no explanation. And then, as we looke d more closely, the riddle gave up its answer. Anchored 
to a stem of sagebrush, we saw the horny pupa of cicada. It had begun to split and the full-grown insect was in 
process of pushing its way out. Each time it struggled, its ca se of amber-colored chitin opened a little more widely. 
The continuous crackling that we he ard was caused by the simultaneous em ergence of thousands upon thousands 
of individuals. How long they had spent underground I c ould never discover. Dr. Edmund Jaeger, who knows as 
much about the fauna and flora of the Western deserts as  anyone now living, tells me that the habits of this 
particular cicada have never been cl osely studied. He himself had never witnessed the mass resurrection upon 
which we had had the good fortune to stumble. All one can be sure of is that these creatures had spent anything 
from two to seventeen years in the soil, and that they had all chosen this particular May morning to climb out of the 
grave, burst their coffins, dry their moist wings and embark upon their life of sex and song. 
 Three weeks later we heard and saw another detachme nt of the buried army coming out into the sun among 
the pines and the flowering fremontias of the San Gabrie l Mountains. The chill of two thousand additional feet of 
elevation had postponed the resurrection; but when it came, it conformed exactly to the pattern set by the insects of 
the desert: the risen pupa, the crackle of splitting horn, the helpless imago waiting for the sun to bake it into 
perfection, and then the flight, the tire less singing, so unremitting that it becomes a part of the silence. The boys in 
the Reservations are doing their best; and perhaps, if they are given the necessary time and money, they may really 
succeed in making the planet uninhabitable. Applied Science is a conjuror, whose bottomless hat yields impartially 
the softest of Angora rabbits and the most petrifying of Medusas. But I am still optimist enough to credit life with 
invincibility, I am still ready to bet that the non-human othe rness at the root of man's being will ultimately triumph 
over the all too human selves who frame the ideologies and engineer the collective suicides. For our survival, if we 
do survive, we shall be less beholden to  our common sense (the name we give  to what happens when we try to 
think of the world in terms of the unanalyzed symbols su pplied by language and the local customs) than to our 
caterpillar- and cicada-sense, to intelligence, in other word s, as it operates on the organic level. That intelligence is 
at once a will to pers istence and an inherited knowl edge of the physiological a nd psychological means by which, 
despite all the follies of the loquacious self, persistence can be achieve d. And beyond survival is transfiguration; 
beyond and including animal grace is the grace of that othe r not-self, of which the desert silence and the desert 
emptiness are the most expressive symbols. 
(From Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

20
 
 
TRAVEL 
 
 
 
The Palio at Siena 
 
 Our rooms were in a tower. From the windows one looked across the brown tiled roofs to where, on its hill, 
stood the cathedral. A hundred feet below was the street, a narrow canyon between high walls, perennially sunless; 
the voices of the passers-by came up, reverberating, as out of  a chasm. Down there they walked always in shadow; 
but in our tower we were the last to lose the sunlight. On the hot days it  was cooler, no doubt, down in the street; 
but we at least had the winds. The waves of the air broke against our tower and flowed past it on either side. And at 
evening, when only the belfries and the domes and the hi ghest roofs were still flus hed by the declining sun, our 
windows were level with the f light of the swifts and swallows. Sunset after sunset all thr ough the long summer, 
they wheeled and darted round our tower. There was always  a swarm of them intricately maneuvering just outside 
the window. They swerved this way and that, they dipped and rose, they checked their headlong flight with a flutter 
of their long pointed wings and turned about within th eir own length. Compact, smooth and tapering, they seemed 
the incarnation of airy speed. And thei r thin, sharp, arrowy cry was speed made  audible. I have sat at my window 
watching them tracing their intricate arabesques until I grew  dizzy; till their shrill cr ying sounded as though from 
within my ears and their flying seemed a motion, inces sant, swift and bewilderingly multitudinous, behind my 
eyes. And all the while the sun declined, the shadows clim bed higher up the houses and towers, and the light with 
which they were tipped became more rosy. And at last the sh adow had climbed to the very top and the city lay in a 
grey and violet twilight beneath the pale sky. 
 One evening, toward the end of June , as I was sitting at the window l ooking at the wheeling birds, I heard 
through the crying of the swifts the sound of a drum. I looked down into the shadowy street, but could see nothing. 
Rub-a-dub, dub, dub, dub -- the sound grew louder and louder,  and suddenly there appeared round the corner 
where our street bent out of sight, thr ee personages out of a Pinturicchio fresc o. They were dressed in liveries of 
green and yellow -- yellow doublet s slashed and tagged with green, parti-co lored hose and shoes, with feathered 
caps of the same colors. Their leader played the drum. The two who followed carried green and yellow banners. 
Immediately below our tower the stre et opens out a little into a tiny piazza. In this clear space the three 
Pinturicchio figures came to a halt and the crowd of  little boys and loafers who fo llowed at their heels grouped 
themselves round to watch. The drummer quickened his beat and the two banner-bearers stepped forward into the 
middle of the little square. They stood ther e for a moment quite still, the right f oot a little in adva nce of the other, 
the left fist on the hip and the lowere d banners drooping from the right. Then, together, they lifted the banners and 
began to wave them round their heads. In the wind of their motion the flags opened out. They were the same size 
and both of them green and yellow, but the colors were ar ranged in a different pattern on each. And what patterns! 
Nothing more "modern" was ever seen. They might have been designed by Picasso for the Russian Ballet. Had 
they been by Picasso, the graver critics would have calle d them futuristic, the sprightlier (I must apologize for both 
these expressions) jazz. But the flags were not Picasso's; they were designe d some four hundred years ago by the 
nameless genius who dressed the Sienese fo r their yearly pageant. This being th e case, the critics can only take off 
their hats. The flags are classical, they are High Art; there is nothing more to be said. 
 The drum beat on. The bannermen waved their flags, so  artfully that the whole expanse of patterned stuff 
was always unfurled and tremulously st retched along the air. They passed the flags from one hand to the other, 
behind their backs, under a lifted leg. Then, at last, drawing themselves toge ther to make a supreme effort, they 
tossed their banners into the air. High they rose, turning slowly, over and over,  hung for an instant at the height of 
their trajectory, then dropped back, the weighted stave fore most, toward their throwers , who caught them as they 
fell. A final wave, then the drum returned to its march rhythm, the bannermen shouldered their flags, and followed 
by the anachronistic children  and idlers from the twentieth century, Pinturicchio's three young bravos swaggered 
off up the dark street out of sight and at length, the drum taps coming faintlier and ever faintlier, out of hearing. 
 Every evening after that, while the swallows were in  full cry and flight about the tower, we heard the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

21
beating of the drum. Every evening, in  the little piazza below us, a fragme nt of Pinturicchio came to life. 
Sometimes it was our friends in green and yellow who returned to wave their flags beneath our windows. 
Sometimes it was men from the other contrade or districts of the town, in blue  and white, red and white, black, 
white and orange, white, green and red, yellow and scarlet.  Their bright pied doublets and parti-colored hose shone 
out from among the drabs and funereal blacks of the twen tieth-century crowd that su rrounded them. Their spread 
flags waved in the street below, like the painted wings of enormous butterf lies. The drummer qu ickened his beat, 
and to the accompaniment of a long-drawn rattle, the banners leapt up, furled and fluttering, into the air. 
 To the stranger who has never seen a Palio these lit tle dress rehearsals are ri chly promising and exciting. 
Charmed by these present hints, he looks forward eagerly to what the day itself holds in store. Even the Sienese are 
excited. The pageant, however familiar, does not pall on them. And all the gambler in them, all the local patriot 
looks forward to the result of the race. Those last days of June before the first Palio, that middle week of August 
before the second, are days of growing excitement and tens ion in Siena. One enjoys th e Palio the more for having 
lived through them. 
 Even the mayor and corporation are infected by the pervading excitement. They are so far carried away 
that, in the last days of June, they send a small army of men down in the great square before the Palazzo Comunale 
to eradicate every blade of grass or tuft of moss that can be found gr owing in the crannies between the flagstones. 
It amounts almost to a national character istic, this hatred of growing things among the works of men. I have often, 
in old Italian towns, seen workmen la boriously weeding the less frequented streets and squares. The Colosseum, 
mantled till thirty or forty years ago with a romantic, Piranesian growth of shrubs, grasses and flowers, was 
officially weeded with such extraordinary energy that its ruinousness was sensibly increased. More stones were 
brought down in those few months of w eeding than had fallen of their own accord in the previous thousand years. 
But the Italians were pleased; which is, after all, the chief thing that matters. Their hatred of weeds is fostered by 
their national pride; a great country, and one which specially piques itself on being modern, cannot allow weeds to 
grow even among its ruins. I entirely understand and sympathize with the Italia n point of view. If Mr. Ruskin and 
his disciples had talked about my house and me as they  talked about Italy and the Italians, I too should pique 
myself on being up-to-date; I should put in bathrooms, central heatin g and a lift, I should have all the moss 
scratched off the walls, I should lay cork  lino on the marble floors. Indeed, I think that I should  probably, in my 
irritation, pull down the whol e house and build a new one. Considering the provocation they have received, it 
seems to me that the Italians have been remarkably moderate in the matte r of weeding, destroying and rebuilding. 
Their moderation is due in part, no doubt, to their compar ative poverty. Their ancestors built with such prodigious 
solidity that it would cost as much to  pull down one of their old houses as to build a new one. Imagine, for 
example, demolishing the Palazzo Strozzi in Florence. It would be about as easy to demolish the Matterhorn. In 
Rome, which is predominantly a baroque, seventeenth-cen tury city, the houses are ma de of flimsier stuff. 
Consequently, modernization progresses th ere much more rapidly than in most other Italian towns. In wealthier 
England very little antiquity has been  permitted to stand. Thus, most of the great country houses of England were 
rebuilt during the eighteenth century. If Italy had pres erved her independence and her prosperity during the 
seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, there would probably be very much less medieval or renaissance 
work now surviving than is actually the case. Money, then, is lacking to modernize completely. Weeding has the 
merit of being cheap and, at the same time, richly symbolic. When you say of a town that the grass grows in its 
streets, you mean that it is utterly dead. Conversely, if there is no grass in its st reets, it must be alive. No doubt the 
mayor and corporation of Siena did not put the argument quite so explic itly. But that the argument was put, 
somehow, obscurely and below the surface of the mind, I do not doubt. The weeding was symbolic of modernity. 
 With the weeders came other workmen who built up round th e curving flanks of the great piazza a series of 
wooden stands, six tiers high, for the sp ectators. The piazza which is shaped, whether by accident or design I do 
not know, like an ancient theater, became for the time be ing indeed a theater. Between the seats and the central 
area of the place, a track was railed o ff and the slippery flags covered pars imoniously with sand. Expectation rose 
higher than ever. 
 And at last the day came. The swallows and swifts wove  their arabesques as usual in the bright golden light 
above the town. But their shrill crying was utterly ina udible, through the deep, continuous, formless murmur of the 
crowd that thronged the streets and th e great piazza. Under its canopy of stone  the great bell of the Mangia tower 
swung incessantly backwards and forwar ds; it too seemed dumb. The talki ng, the laughter, the shouting of forty

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

22
thousand people rose up from the piazza, in a column of solid sound, impenetrable to any ordinary noise. 
 It was after six. We took our places  in one of the stands opposite the Palazzo Comunale. Our side of the 
piazza was already in the shade; but the sun still shone on the palace and its tall slende r tower, making their rosy 
brickwork glow as though by inward fire. An immense conc ourse of people filled the s quare and all the tiers of 
seats round it. There were people in every window, even  on the roofs. At the Derby, on boat-race days, at 
Wembley I have seen larger crowds; but never, I think, so many people confined within so small a space. 
 The sound of a gunshot broke through the noise of voices; and at the signa l a company of mounted 
carabiniers rode into the piazz a, driving the loungers who still thronged the track before  them. They were in full 
dress uniform, black and red, with silver trimmings; cocked hats on their heads and swords in their hands. On their 
handsome little horses, they looked like a squadron of smart Napoleonic cavalry. The idlers retreated before them, 
squeezing their way through every convenient opening in th e rails into the central ar ea, which was soon densely 
packed. The track was cleared at a wa lk and, cleared, was rounded again at th e trot, dashingly, in  the best Carle 
Vernet style. The carabiniers got their applause and retired. The crowd waited expectantly. For a moment there was 
almost a silence. The bell on the tower ceased to be dumb . Some one in the crowd let loose a couple of balloons. 
They mounted perpendicularly into the st ill air, a red sphere and a purple. They passed out of the shadow into the 
sunlight; and the red became a ruby, the purple a glowing amethyst. When they  had risen above the level of the 
roofs, a little breeze caught them and carried them away, still mounting all the time, over our heads, out of sight. 
 There was another gunshot and Vernet was exchanged fo r Pinturicchio. The noise of the crowd grew louder 
as they appeared, the bell swung, but gave no sound, and acro ss the square the trumpets of the procession were all 
but inaudible. Slowly they marched round, the representatives of all the seventeen comrade of the city. Besides its 
drummer and its two bannermen, each contrada had a man-at-arms on horseback, three or four halbardiers and 
young pages and, if it happened to be one of the ten compe ting in the race, a jockey, all of them wearing the 
Pinturicchian livery in its ow n particular colors. Their progress was slow ; for at every fifty paces they stopped, to 
allow the bannermen to give an exhibitio n of their skill with the flags. They must have taken the best part of an 
hour to get round. But the time seemed onl y too short. The Palio is a spectacl e of which one does not grow tired. I 
have seen it three times now and was as much delighted on the last occasion as on the first. 
 English tourists are often skeptical about the Palio. They remember those terrible "pageants" which were all 
the rage some fifteen years ago in their own country, and th ey imagine that the Palio will turn out to be something 
of the same sort. But let me reassure them; it is not. Th ere is no poetry by Louis Napol eon Parker at Siena. There 
are no choruses of young ladies voic ing high moral sentiments in low voi ces. There are no flabby actor-managers 
imperfectly disguised as Hengist and Ho rsa, no crowd of gesticulating supe rnumeraries dressed in the worst of 
taste and the cheapest of bunting. Nor finally does one of ten meet at Siena with that almost invariable 
accompaniment of the English pageant -- rain. No, the Palio is just a show; having no "meaning" in particular, but 
by the mere fact of being traditional and still alive, signifying infinitely more than the dead-born English affairs for 
all their Parkerian blank verse and their dramatic re-e vocations. For these pages and men-at-arms and bannermen 
come straight out of the Pinturicchian past. Their clothes are thos e designed for their ancest ors, copied faithfully, 
once in a generation, in the same colors and the same rich materials. They wal k, not in cotton or flannelette, but in 
silks and furs and velvets. And the colors were matche d, the clothes originally cu t by men whose taste was the 
faultless taste of the early renaissance. To be sure there are costumiers with as good a taste in these days. But it was 
not Paquin, not Lanvin or Poir et who dressed the actors of  the English pageants; it was professional wig-makers 
and lady amateurs. I have already spoken of the beauty of the flags -- the bold, fantastic, "modern" design of them. 
Everything else at the Palio is in keeping with the flags, daring, brilliant and yet always right, always 
irreproachably refined. The one false note is always the Palio itself -- the painted banner which is given to the 
contrada whose horse wins the race. This banner is specially painted every year for the occasion. Look at it, where 
it comes along, proudly exposed on the great medieval war ch ariot which closes the pro cession -- look at it, or 
preferably don't look at it. It is a ty pical property from the wardrobe of an English pageant committee. It is a lady 
amateur's masterpiece. Shuddering, one averts the eyes.  
 Preceded by a line of quattrocento pages carrying festoons and laurel le aves and escorted by a company of 
mounted knights, the war chariot roll ed slowly and ponderously past, bear ing aloft the unwor thy trophy. And by 
now the trumpets at the head of the procession sounded, al most inaudibly for us, from the further side of the 
piazza. And at last the whole procession had made its round and was lined up in close order in front of the Palazzo

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

23
Comunale. Over the heads of the spectat ors standing in the central  area, we could see all the thirty-four banners 
waving and waving in a last concerted display and at last, together, all leaping high into the air, hesitating at the top 
of their leap, falling back, out of sight. There was a burst of applause. The pageant was over. Another gunshot. And 
in the midst of more applause, the racehorses were ridden to the starting place. 
 The course is three times round the piazza, whose shape, as I have said, is something like that of an ancient 
theater. Consequently, there are two sharp turns, where the ends of the semicircle meet  the straight diameter. One 
of these, owing to the irregularity of the plan, is sharper than the other. The outside wall of the track is padded with 
mattresses at this point, to prevent impetuous jockeys who take the corner too fast from dashing themselves to 
pieces. The jockeys ride bareback; the hor ses run on a thin layer of sand spread  over the flagstones of the piazza. 
The Palio is probably the most danger ous flat-race in the world. And it is  made the more dangerous by the 
excessive patriotism of the rival contrade. For the winner of the race as he rein s in his horse after passing the post, 
is set upon by the supporters of the other contrade (who all think that their horse should have won), with so real 
and earnest a fury that the carabiniers must always inte rvene to protect man and beas t from lynching. Our places 
were at a point some two or three h undred yards beyond the post, so that we had an excellent vi ew of the battle 
waged round the winning horse, as he slackened speed. Scar cely was the post passed when the crowd broke its 
ranks and rushed out into the course. Still cantering, the horse came up the track. A gang of young men ran in 
pursuit, waving sticks and shouting. And with them, their Napoleonic coat tails  streaming in the wind of their own 
speed, their cocked hats bobbing, and brandishing swords in their white-gloved hands, ran the rescuing carabiniers. 
There was a brief struggle round the now stationary horse, the young me n were repulsed, and surrounded by 
cocked hats, followed by a crowd of supporters from its native contrada, the beast was led off in triumph. We 
climbed down from our places. The piazza was now entirely sh aded. It was only on the upper part of the tower and 
the battlements of the great Palazzo th at the sun still shone. Rosily agains t the pale blue sky, they glowed. The 
swifts still turned and turned overhead in the light. It is said that at even ing and at dawn thes e light-loving birds 
mount on their strong wings in to the sky to bid a last fa rewell or earliest good-morrow to  the sinking or the rising 
sun. While we lie sleeping or have re signed ourselves to darkness the swif ts are looking down from their watch-
tower in the height of heaven over th e edge of the turning planet toward the light. Was it a fa ble, I wondered, 
looking up at the wheeling birds? Or was it true? Meanwhile, some one was swearing at me for not looking where I 
was going. I postponed the speculation. 
(From Along the Road) 
 
 
 
Sabbioneta 
 
 "They call it the Palazzo del Te," said the maid at the little inn in the back street where we had lunch, 
"because the Gonzaga used to go and take tea there." And that was all that she, and probably most of the other 
inhabitants of Mantua, knew about the Gonzaga or their pa laces. It was surprising, perhaps, that she should have 
known so much. Gonzaga -- the name, at least, still fa intly reverberated. After two hundred years, how many 
names are still remembered? Few indeed. The Gonzaga, it se emed to me, enjoy a degree of immortality that might 
be envied them. They have vanished, th ey are as wholly extinct as the dinosau r; but in the cities they once ruled 
their name still vaguely echoes, and for those who care to listen they have le ft behind some of the most eloquent 
sermons on the vanity of human wishes and the mutability of fortune that stones have ever mutely preached. 
 I have seen many ruins and of ev ery period. Stonehenge and Ansedonia, Ostia and medieval Ninfa (which 
the duke of Sermoneta is busily turni ng into the likeness of a neat suburba n park), Bolsover and the gruesome 
modern ruins in Northern France. I ha ve seen great cities dead or in decay : Pisa, Bruges and the newly murdered 
Vienna. But over none, it seemed to me, did there brood  so profound a melancholy as  over Mantua; none seemed 
so dead or so utterly bereft of glory; nowhere was de solation more pregnant with the memory of splendor, the 
silence nowhere so richly musical with echoes. There are a thousand rooms in the labyrinthine Reggia at Mantua -- 
Gothic rooms, rooms of the renaissance, baroque rooms, ro oms rich with the absurd pr etentious decorations of the 
first empire, huge presence chambers and closets and the ho rribly exquisite apartments of the dwarfs -- a thousand 
rooms, and their walls enclose an emptiness that is th e mournful ghost of departed  plenitude. It is through

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

24
Mallarmé's creux néant musicien that one walks in Mantua. 
 And not in Mantua alone. For wherever the Gonzag a lived, they left behind them the same pathetic 
emptiness, the same pregnant desolation, the same echoes, the same ghosts of splendor. 
 The Palazzo del Te is made sad and beautiful with the same melancholy as broods in the Reggia. True, the 
stupid vulgarity of Giulio Ro mano was permitted to sprawl over its wall in a series of deplorable frescoes (it is 
curious, by the way, that Giulio Romano should have been the only Italian ar tist of whom Shakespeare had ever 
heard, or at least the only one  he ever mentioned); but the absurdities a nd grossnesses seem actually to make the 
place more touching. The departed tenants of the pal ace become in a mannner more real to one, when one 
discovers that their taste ran to trompe l'oeil pictures of fighting giants and mildly pornographic scenes out of 
pagan mythology. And seeming more human, they seem also more dead; and the void left by their disappearance is 
more than ever musical with sadness. 
 Even the cadets of the Gonzaga house enjoyed a pow er of leaving behind them a more than Pompeian 
desolation. Twenty miles from Mantua, on the way to Cremona, is a village ca lled Sabbioneta. It li es near the Po, 
though not on its banks; posseses, for a village, a tolerably large population, mostly engaged in husbandry; is rather 
dirty and has an appearance -- probably qui te deceptive -- of poverty. In  fact it is just like a ll other villages of the 
Lombard plain, but with this difference: a Gonzaga on ce lived here. The squalor of Sabbioneta is no common 
squalor; it is a squalor that was once magnificence. Its fa rmers and horse-copers live, di rtily and destructively, in 
treasures of late renaissance architecture. The town hall is a ducal palace; in the m unicipal school, children are 
taught under carved and painted ceilings, and when the master  is out of the room they  write their names on the 
marble bellies of the patient, batte red caryatids who uphold the scutcheoned mantel. The weekly cinema show is 
given in an Olympic theater,  built a few years after the famous theater at Vicenza, by Pallad io's pupil, Scamozzi. 
The people worship in sumptuous churches , and if ever soldiers happen to pa ss through the town, th ey are billeted 
in the deserted summer palace. 
 The creator of all these splendo rs was Vespasiano, son of that Lu igi Gonzaga, the boon companion of 
kings, whom, for his valor and his fabulous strength, his contemporaries nicknamed Rodomonte. Luigi died young, 
killed in battle; and his son Vespasiano was brought up by his aunt, Giulia Gonzaga, one of the most perfectly 
courtly ladies of her age. She had him taught Latin, Gree k, the mathematics, good manners and the art of war. This 
last he practiced with distinction, se rving at one time or another under many princes, but chiefly under Philip II of 
Spain, who honored him with singular favor s. Vespasiano seems to have been the typical Italia n tyrant of his 
period -- cultured, intelligent and only just so much of  an ungovernably ferocious ruffian as one would expect a 
man to be who has been brought up in the possession of abso lute power. It was in the in timacy of private life that 
he displayed his least amiable characteristics. He poisoned his first wife on a suspicion, probably unfounded, of her 
infidelity, murdered her supposed lover and exiled his rela tions. His second wife left hi m mysteriously after three 
years of married life and died of pure misery in a convent, carrying wi th her into the gr ave nobody knew what 
frightful secret. His third wife, it is tr ue, lived to a ripe old age; but then Vespasiano himself died after only a few 
years of marriage. His only son, whom he loved with the anxious passion of the ambitious parvenu who desires to 
found a dynasty, one day annoyed him by not taking off his cap when he met him in the street. Vespasiano rebuked 
him for this lack of respect. The boy answered back  impertinently. Whereupon Vespasiano gave him such a 
frightful kick in the groin that the boy died. Which shows that, even when chastising one's own children, it is 
advisable to observe the Queensberry rules. 
 It was in 1560 that Vespasiano deci ded to convert the miserable village from which he took his title into a 
capital worthy of its ruler. He set to work with energy. In a few years the village of squalid cottages clustering 
round a feudal castle had given place to a walled town, with broad streets, two fine squares, a couple of palaces and 
a noble Gallery of Antiques. These last Vespasiano had inherited from his father, Rodomonte, who had been at the 
sack of Rome in 1527 and had shown himself an industrious  and discriminating looter. Sa bbioneta was in its turn 
looted by the Austrians, who carried o ff Rodomonte's spoils to Mantua. The mu seum remains; but there is nothing 
in it but the creux néant musicien which the Gonzaga alone, of all the prin ces in Italy, had th e special art of 
creating by their departure. 
 We had come to Sabbioneta from Parma. In the vast  Farnese palace there is no musically echoing void -- 
merely an ordinary, undisturbing emptiness. Only in the colossal Estensian theater does one recapture anything like 
the Mantuan melancholy. We drove thr ough Colorno, where the last of the Este built a summer palace about as

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

25
large as Hampton Court. Over the Po, by a bridge of  boats, through Casalmaggiore and on, tortuously, by little by-
roads across the plain. A line of walls presented themselv es, a handsome gate. We drove in, and immediately faint 
ghostly oboes began to play around us; we were in Sabbioneta among the Gonzaga ghosts. 
 The central piazza of the town is oblong; Vespasiano's palace stands at one of the shorter ends, presenting 
to the world a modest façade, five windows wide, once rich with decorations, but now bare. It serves at present as 
town hall. In the waiting-room on the first floor, stand four life-sized equestrian figures, carved in wood and 
painted, representing four of Vespasiano's ancestors. Once th ere was a squadron of twelve; but the rest have been 
broken up and burned. This crime, together with all the ot her ravages committed by time or vandals in the course 
of three centuries, was attributed by the mayor, who pe rsonally did us the honors of his municipality, to the 
socialists who had preceded him in office. It is unnecessary to add that he himself was a fascista. 
 We walked round in the emptiness under the superb ly carved and gilded ceili ngs. The porter sat among 
decayed frescoes in the Cabinet of Di ana. The town council held its meeti ngs in the Ducal Saloon. The Gallery of 
the Ancestors housed a clerk and the municipal archives . The deputy mayor had his office in the Hall of the 
Elephants. The Sala d'Oro had been turned into an infants'  class-room. We walked out again into the sunlight fairly 
heart-broken. 
 The Olympic Theater is a few yards down the str eet. Accompanied by the oblig ing young porter from the 
Cabinet of Diana, we entered. It is a tiny theater, but complete and marvelously elegant. From the pit, five 
semicircular steps rise to a pillared loggia, behind which -- having the width of the whole auditorium -- is the ducal 
box. The loggia consists of twel ve Corinthian pillars, topped by a cornice. On the cornice, above each pillar, stand 
a dozen stucco gods and goddesses. Noses and fingers, paps and ears have gone the way of all art; but the general 
form of them survives. Their white silhouettes gesticulate elegantly against the twilight of the hall. 
 The stage was once adorned with a fixed scene in perspe ctive, like that which Palladio built at Vicenza. The 
mayor wanted us to believe that it was his Bolshevik pr edecessors who had destroyed it; but as a matter of fact it 
was taken down about a century ago. Gone, too, are the frescoes with which the walls were once covered. One year 
of epidemic the theater was used as a fever hospital. When the plague had passed, it was thought that the frescoes 
needed disinfecting; they were thickly white-washed. There is no money to scrape the white-wash off again. 
 We followed the young porter out of the theater. Anothe r two or three hundred yards and we were in the 
Piazza d'Armi. It is an oblong, grassy space. On the long axis of the rectangle, n ear one end there stands, 
handsomely pedestaled, a fluted marble column, topped by a statue of Athena, the tutelary goddess of Vespasiano's 
metropolis. The pedestal, the capital and the statue are of  the late renaissance. But the column is antique, and 
formed a part of Rodomonte's Roman booty. Rodomonte was evidently no petty thief. If a thing is worth doing it is 
worth doing thoroughly; that, evidently, was his motto. 
 One of the long sides of the rectangle is occupied by the Gallery of Antiques. It is a superb building, 
architecturally by far the finest thing in the town. The lo wer story consists of an ope n arcade and the walls of the 
gallery above are ornamented with blind arches, havi ng well-proportioned windows at  the center of each and 
separated from one another by Tuscan pila sters. A very bold projec ting cornice, topped by a low roof, finishes the 
design, which for sober and massive elegance is one of  the most remarkable of its kind with which I am 
acquainted. 
 The opposite side of the piazza is  open, a hedge separating it from th e back gardens of the neighboring 
houses. It was here, I fancy, that the feudal castle originally stood. It  was pulled down, however, during the 
eighteenth century (busy Bolshe viks!) and its bricks employed, more usef ully but less aesthetically, to strengthen 
the dykes which defend the surrounding plain, none too impregnably, from the waters of the Po. 
 Its destruction has left Vespasiano's summer palace, or  Palace of the Garden, isolated (save where it joins 
the Gallery of the Antiques), and rather  forlorn at the end of the long piazza.  It is a long, low building of only two 
stories, rather insignificant from outside. It is evident that Vespasiano built it as economically as he could. For him 
the place was only a week-end cottage, a holiday resort, whither he could escape from  the metropolitan splendor 
and bustle of the palace in the market-place, a quarter of  a mile away. Like all othe r rulers of small states, 
Vespasiano must have found it extremely difficult to take an effective holiday. He could not go ten miles in any 
direction without coming to a frontier. Within his domini ons it was impossible to have a change of air. Wisely, 
therefore, he decided to concentrate his magnificences. He built his Balmoral within five minutes' walk of his 
Buckingham Palace.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

26
 We knocked at the door. The caretaker who opened to us was an old woman who might have gone on to 
any stage and acted Juliet's Nu rse without a moment's rehearsal. Within the first two minutes of our acquaintance 
with her she confided to us that she had just got married -- for the third time , at the age of seventy. Her comments 
on the connubial state were so very Juliet's Nurse, so pos itively Wife-of-Bath, that we were made to feel quite 
early-Victorian in comparison with this robustious old gammer from the quattrocento. After having told us all that 
can be told (and much that cannot be told, at any rate in polite society) about the married state, she proceeded to do 
us the honors of the house. She led the way, opening the shutte rs of each room in the long suite, as we entered it. 
And as the light came in through the unglazed windows, wh at Gonzagesque ravishments were revealed to us. 
There was a Cabinet of Venus, with the remains of voluptuous nudes, a Hall of the Winds with puffing cherubs and 
a mantel in red marble; a Cabinet of the Caesars, floored  with marble and adorned w ith medallions of all the 
ruffians of antiquity; a Hall of the My ths on whose ceiling, vaulted into the likeness of a truncated pyramid seen 
from within, were five delightful scenes from Lemprièr e -- an Icarus, an Apollo and Marsyas, a Phaeton, an 
Arachne and, in the midst, a to me so mewhat mysterious scene: a naked b eauty sitting on the back, not of a bull 
(that would have been simple enough), but of a reclining ho rse, which turns its head amorously toward her, while 
she caresses its neck. Who was the lady and who the trav estied god do not rightly know . Vague memories of an 
escapade of Saturn's float through my mind. But perhaps I am slandering a respectable deity. 
 But in any case, whatever its subj ect, the picture is charming. Vespasia no's principal artist was Bernardino 
Campi of Cremona. He was not a good painter, of course; but at least he was gracefully and charmingly, instead of 
vulgarly mediocre, like Giulio Romano. About the Palazzo del Te there hangs a certain faded frightfulness; but the 
Giardino is all sweetness -- mannered, no doubt, and rather  feeble -- but none the less authentic in its ruinous 
decay. 
 The old caretaker expounded the pictur es to us as we went round -- not out  of any knowledge of what they 
represented, but purely out of  her imagination, which was a good deal more  interesting. In the Hall of the Graces, 
where the walls are adorned with what rema ins of a series of very pretty little grotteschi in the Pompeian manner, 
her fancy surpassed itself. These, she said, were the reco rds of the Duke's dreams. Each time he dreamed a dream 
he sent for his painter and had it drawn on the walls of this  room. These -- she pointed to a pair of Chimeras -- he 
saw in a nightmare; these dancing satyrs visited his sleep after a merry evening; these four urns were dreamt of 
after too much wine. As for the three naked Graces, from whom the room takes its name, as for those -- over the 
Graces she once more became too Wife-of-Bath to be recorded. 
 Her old cracked laughter went echoing down the empty r ooms; and it seemed to precipitate and crystallize 
all the melancholy suspended, as it were, in solution wi thin those bleared and peeling walls. The sense of 
desolation, vaguely felt before, became poignant. And when the old woman ushered us into another room, dark and 
smelling of mold like the rest, and threw open the shutters  and called what the light revealed the "Hall of the 
Mirrors," I could almost have wept. For in the Hall of the Mirrors there are no more mirrors, only the elaborate 
framing of them on walls and ceiling. Where the glasses of  Murano once shone are spaces of bare plaster that stare 
out like blind eyes, blankly a nd, it seems after a little, repr oachfully. "They used to dan ce in this room," said the 
old woman. 
(From Along the Road) 
 
 
 
Between Peshawar and Lahore 
 
 At Peshawar we were seized with  one of our periodical financial panics. Money, in this country, slips 
rapidly between the fingers, particularly  between the fingers of the tourist. Gr eat wads of it have to be handed out 
every time one gets into the train; fo r fares are high and distances enormous. No place in India seems to be less 
than three hundred miles from any othe r place; the longer journeys have to be measured in thousands. Financial 
panics are justifiable. We decided to travel second-class as far as Lahore. 
 For the first hour or so we were alone in our comp artment. We congratulated ourselves on having secured 
all the comfort and privacy of first-class traveling at exactly half the price. In future, we decided, we would always 
travel second. But nature abhors a vacuum, and our compartment was evidently the object of her special

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

27
abhorrence. When the train stopped at Campbellpur, we were invaded. In the twinkling of an eye our luxurious 
emptiness was filled to overflowing with luggage and humanity. And what queer specimens of humanity! The 
leader of the party which now entered the compartment was a middle-aged man weari ng a yellow robe and, on his 
head, a kind of quilted bonnet with hanging ear-flaps. He  was profusely garlanded w ith yellow chrysanthemums, 
and had been followed on to the platform by a large crowd of flower-bearing admirers and devotees. Our ignorance 
of the language did not permit us to discover who this exalted person might  be. But he was evidently some kind of 
high priest, some Hindu pope of consid erable holiness, to judge by the respect which was paid him by his 
numerous retinue and his admirers. His passage along the line must have been well advertised; for at every station 
our compartment was invaded by a swarm of devotees w ho came to kiss the great man's feet and to crave a 
blessing, which in most cases he seemed too lazy to give . Even the guards and ticket-c ollectors and stationmasters 
came in to pay their respects. The enthusiasm of one ticket-collector was so great that he traveled about thirty miles 
in our already packed compartment, simply in order to  be near the holy man. He, m eanwhile, passed the time by 
counting his money, which was contained in a large bras s-bound box, by loudly eating a nd, later, dozing. Even at 
the stations he did not take the trouble  to rouse himself, but reclined with closed eyes along his seat, and passively 
permitted the faithful to kiss his feet. When one is as holy as he evidently was, it is unnecessary to keep up 
appearances, behave decently, or do a nything for one's followers. Office and he reditary honor claim the respect of 
a believing people quite as much as personal merit. 
 Judging by appearances, which are ofte n deceptive, I should say that th is particular holy man had no 
personal merit, but a very great office.  His face, which had the elements of a fine and powerful face, seemed to 
have disintegrated and run to fat under the influence of a hoggish self-indulgen ce. To look at, he was certainly one 
of the most repulsive human specimens I have ever seen. Bu t of course he may in reality have been a saint and an 
ascetic, a preacher and a practicer of the moral doctrines fo rmulated in the Gita, or ev en one of those pure-souled 
oriental mystics who, we are told, are to leaven the materialism of our Western civilization. He may have been, but 
I doubt it. All that we could be certain of was that he  looked unpleasant, and was undoubted ly dirty; also that he 
and his admirers exhaled the sour stink of garments long unwashed. 
 Tolstoy objected to too much cleanli ness on the ground that to be too clean is a badge of class. It is only the 
rich who can afford the time and money to wash their bo dies and shift their linen frequently. The laborer who 
sweats for his living, and whose house contains no bathroom, whose wardrobes no superfluous shirts, must stink. It 
is inevitable, and it is also right and proper, that he shoul d. Work is prayer. Work is also stink. Therefore stink is 
prayer. So, more or less, argues Tolstoy, who goes on to condemn the rich for not stinking, and for bringing up 
their children to have a prejudice against all stinks however natural and even creditable. The non-stinker's prejudice 
against stink is largely a class prejudice, and therefore to be condemned. 
 Tolstoy is quite right, of cour se. We, who were brought up on open win dows, clean shirts, hot baths, and 
sanitary plumbing, find it hard to tole rate twice-breathed air and all the odors which crowded humanity naturally 
exhales. Our physical education has b een such that the majority of our fellow-beings, particularly those less 
fortunately circumstanced than ourselves, seem to us slightly or even extremely disgusting. A man may have strong 
humanitarian and democratic principles; but if he happens to have been br ought up as a bath-taking, shirt-changing 
lover of fresh air, he will have to overcome certain physical repugnances befo re he can bring himself to put those 
principles into practice to the exte nt, at any rate, of associating freely  with men and women whose habits are 
different from his own. It is a deplorable fact; but there it is. Tolstoy's remedy is that we should all stink together. 
Other reformers desire to make it economically possible for every man to have as many hot baths and to change his 
shirt as often as do the privileged non-stinkers at the present day. Personally, I prefer the second alternative. 
 Meanwhile, the crowd in our compartment increased. The day, as it advanced, grew hotter. And suddenly 
the holy man woke up and began to hawk and spit all over the compartment. By the time we reached Rawal Pindi 
we had decided that the twenty-two rupees we s hould economize by remaining seven hours longer among our 
second-class brothers were not enough. We had our luggag e transferred into a first-class carriage and paid the 
difference. The only other occupant of the compartment was an English official of the Kashmir State, bound for his 
winter headquarters at Jammu. He was a dim little man; but at any rate his linen was clean, and he was not in the 
least holy. Nobody came in to kiss his feet. 
 For the rest of the journey I ruminated my anti-cleric alism. Indian friends have assured me that the power 
of the priests is less than it was,  and goes on rapidly waning. I hope they are right and that the process may be

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

28
further accelerated. And not in India alone. There is still, for my taste, too much kissing of amethyst rings as well 
as of slippered feet. There are still too many black co ats in the West, too many orange ones in the East. Écrasez 
I'infâme. My traveling companion had made me, for the moment, a thorough-going Voltairian. 
 It is a simple creed, Voltairianism. In its simplicity lies its charm, lies the secret of its success -- and also of 
its fallaciousness. For, in our muddl ed human universe, nothing so simple can possibly be true , can conceivably 
"work." 
 If the infâme were squashed, if insecticide were scattered on all the clerical beet les, whether black or 
yellow, if pure rationalism became the uni versal faith, all would automatically be well. So runs the simple creed of 
the anti-clericals. It is too simple, and the assumptions on which it is based are too sweeping. For, to begin with, is 
the infâme always infamous, and are the beetles invariably ha rmful? Obviously not. Nor can it be said that the 
behavior-value of pure rationalism (wha tever the truth-value of its underlying assumptions) is necessarily superior 
to the behavior-value of irrational beliefs which may be a nd, in general, almost certain ly are untrue. And further, 
the vast majority of human beings are not interested in reason or satisfied with what it teaches. Nor is reason itself 
the most satisfactory instrument for th e understanding of life. Such are a few of the complications which render so 
simple a formula as the anti-clerical's inapplicable to our real and chaotic existence. 
 Man's progress has been contingent on his capacity to organize societie s. It is only when protected by 
surrounding society from aggression, when freed by the organized labor of society from the necessity of hunting or 
digging for his food, it is only, that is to say, when society has tempered and to a great extent abolished the struggle 
for personal existence, that the man of talent can exer cise his capacities to the full. And it is only by a well-
organized society that the results of his labors can be preserved for th e enrichment of succeeding generations. Any 
force that tends to the strengthening of  society is, therefore, of the highest  biological importance. Religion is 
obviously such a force. All religions have been unanimous in encouraging within limits  that have tended to grow 
wider and ever wider, the social, altruistic, humanitarian  proclivities of man and in  condemning his anti-social, 
self-assertive tendencies. Those who like to speak anthropomorphically would be justified in saying that religion is 
a device employed by the Life Force for the promotion of its  evolutionary designs. But th ey would be justified in 
adding that religion is also a device employed by the Devil for the dissemination of idiocy, intolerance, and servile 
abjection. My fellow passenger from Campbellpur di d something, no doubt, to encourage brotherly love, 
forbearance, and mutual helpfulness among his flock. But he also did his best to deepen  their congenital stupidity 
and prevent it from being tempered by the acquirement of correct and useful knowledge, he did his best to terrify 
them with imaginary fears into servili ty and to flatter them with groundless hopes into passive contentment with a 
life unworthy of human beings. What he di d in the name of the evol utionary Life Force, he undid in the name of 
the Devil. I cherish a pious hope  that he did just a trifle more than he  undid, and that the Devil remained, as the 
result of his ministry, by ever so little the loser. 
 
 
 
Jaipur 
 
 At Jaipur we were fortunate in havi ng an introduction to one of the great thakurs of the State. He was a 
mighty land holder, the owner of twenty villages w ith populations ranging from five hundred to as many 
thousands, a feudal lord who paid for his fief (until, a year or two ago, a somewhat simpler and more modern 
system of tenure was introduced) by contributing to the State army one hundred and fifty armed and mounted men. 
This nobleman was kind enough to place his elephant at our disposal. 
 It was a superb and particularly lofty specimen, with  gold-mounted tusks; ate two hundredweights of food a 
day and must have cost at least six hundred a year to keep. An expe nsive pet. But for a man in the thakur's 
position, we gathered, indispensable, a necessity. Pachyderms in Rajputana are what glass coaches were in Europe 
a century and a half ago -- essential luxuries. 
 The thakur was a charming and cultured man, hospitably kind as only Indians can be. But at the risk of 
seeming ungrateful, I must confess, th at, of all the animals I have ever ridden, the elepha nt is the most 
uncomfortable mount. On the level, it is true, the motion is not too bad. One seems to be riding on a small chronic 
earthquake; that is all. The earthquake becomes more disquieting when the beast begins to climb. But when it goes

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

29
downhill, it is like the end of the world. The animal descends very slowly and with an infinite caution, planting one 
huge foot deliberately before the other, and giving you tim e between each calculated st ep to anticipate the next 
convulsive spasm of movement -- a spasm that seems to l oosen from its place every organ in the rider's body, that 
twists the spine, that wrenches all th e separate muscles of the loins and thorax. The hills round Jaipur are not very 
high. Fortunately; for by the end of the three or four hundr ed feet of our climbing and descending, we had almost 
reached the limits of our endurance. I returned full of admiration for Hannibal. He crossed the Alps on an elephant. 
 We made two expeditions with the pachyderm; one  -- over a rocky pass entailing, there and back, two 
climbs and two sickening descents -- to the tanks and ruined temples of Galta, and one to the deserted palaces of 
Amber. Emerging from the palace precincts  -- I record the trivial and all t oo homely incident, because it set me 
mournfully reflecting about the cosmos  -- our monster halted and, with its us ual deliberation, relieved nature, 
portentously. Hardly, the opera tion over, had it resumed its march when an old woman who had been standing at 
the door of a hovel among the ruin s, expectantly waiting -- we had wondered for what  -- darted forward and fairly 
threw herself on the mound of steaming excrement. There wa s fuel here, I suppose, for a week's cooking. "Salaam, 
Maharaj," she called up to us, bestowing in her gratitude  the most opulent title she could lay her tongue to. Our 
passage had been to her like a sudden and unexpected fa ll of manna. She thanked us , she blessed the great and 
charitable Jumbo for his Gargantuan bounty. 
 Our earthquake lurched on. I thought of  the scores of millions of human be ings to whom the passage of an 
unconstipated elephant seems a godsend, a stroke of e normous good luck. The thought depressed me. Why are we 
here, men and women, eighteen hundred millions of us, on this remarkable and perhaps unique planet? To what 
end? Is it to go about looking for dung -- cow dung, hor se dung, the enormous and princely excrement of 
elephants? Evidently it is -- for a good many of us at any rate. It seemed an  inadequate reason, I thought, for our 
being here -- immortal souls, first cousins of the angels, own brothers of Buddha and Mozart and Sir Isaac Newton. 
 But a little while later I saw that I was wrong to let the cons ideration depress me. If it depressed me, that 
was only because I looked at the whole matter from the wr ong end, so to speak. In painting my mental picture of 
the dung-searchers I had filled my foregr ound with the figures of Sir Isaac Newt on and the rest of them. These, I 
perceived, should have been relegated to the remote background and the fore ground should have been filled with 
cows and elephants. The picture so arranged, I should have been able to form a more philosophical and 
proportionable estimate of the dung-searcher s. For I should have seen at a glan ce how vastly superior were their 
activities to those of the animal producers of dung in the foreground. Th e philosophical Martian would admire the 
dung-searchers for having discovered a use for dung; no other animal, he would point ou t, has had the wit to do 
more than manufacture it. 
 We are not Martians and our traini ng makes us reluctant to think of ourselves as animals. Nobody inquires 
why cows and elephants inhabit the world. There is as little reason why we should be here, eating, drinking, 
sleeping, and in the intervals reading metaphysics, saying prayers, or collecting dung. We are here, that is all; and 
like other animals we do what our native capacities a nd our environment permit of our doing. Our achievement, 
when we compare it with that of cows and elephants, is  remarkable. They automatically make dung; we collect it 
and turn it into fuel. It is not something to be depressed about; it is something to be proud of. Still, in spite of the 
consolations of philosophy, I remained pensive. 
(From Jesting Pilate) 
 
 
 
Atitlan 
 
 The story of the Spanish conquest is true but incred ible. That Tenochtitlan was taken, that Cortes marched 
from Mexico to Honduras, that Alvarado broke the power of the Quichés and Cakchiquels -- these are facts, but 
facts so immoderately unlikely that I have never been able to believe them except on authority; reason and 
imagination withheld their assent. At Panajachel, I made an acquaintance who convinced me, for the first time, that 
everything in Prescott and Bernal Diaz had really happened. He was an old Spaniard who lived with an Indian wife 
and their family in a large rambling house by the lake, making his living as a taxidermist and dresser of skins. He 
was wonderfully expert at his job and had a firsthand knowledge of the birds, mammals and reptiles of the country.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

30
But it was not what he did or said that  interested me most; it was what he was. As I watched him moving about the 
terrace of his house, a gaunt, bony figure, but active and powe rful, his black beard aggressive in the wind, his nose 
like an eagle's, his eyes glittering, restless and fierce, I suddenly understood the how and the why of the Spanish 
conquest. The strength of the Indians is a strength of resistance, of passivity. Matched against these eager, violently 
active creatures from across the sea, they had no chance -- no more chance th an a rock against a sledge hammer. 
True, the Indian rock was a very large one, but the hammer, though small, was wielded with terrific force. Under 
its quick reiterated blows, the strangely sculptured mono lith of American civilization broke into fragments. The 
bits are still there, indestructible, an d perhaps some day they may be fused together again into  a shapely whole; 
meanwhile they merely testify, in their scattered nullity, to the amazing force behind the Spanish hammer. 
 The old taxidermist went into the house and returned a moment later with a large bucket full of a glutinous 
and stinking liquid. 
 "Look here," he said; and he drew out of this dis gusting soup yards and yards of  an enormous snakeskin. 
"Qué bonito!" he kept repeating, as he smoothe d it out. "Like silk. Nobody here knows how to tan a snakeskin as 
well as I." 
 I nodded and made the appropriate noise s. But it was not at the skin that I was looking; it was at the old 
man's hands. They were big hands, with fingers long, but square-tipped; hands that moved with a deft power, that 
reached out and closed with a quick, unhesitating rapacity; the hands of a conquistador. 
 He asked too much for the skin he finally sold us; but I did not grudge the money; for, along with two yards 
of beautiful serpent's leather, I had bought the key to Sp anish-American history, and to  me that was worth several 
times the extra dollar I had paid for my python. 
 
 
 
Sololà 
 
 The market at Sololà was a walk ing museum of fancy dress. Unlike the Indians of Mexico, who have 
mostly gone into white cotton pajamas, with a blanke t slung over the shoulder in lieu of great-coat, the 
Guatemaltecos of the highlands have kept  their old costumes. This conservatism  has been to some extent affected 
by the slump and the persuasive salesmanship of shopkeep ers and commercial traveler s. Nobody starves in this 
self-supporting agricultural comm unity; but money is a great deal scarce r than it was a few years ago, when the 
coffee fincas were in full production and called, during the pick ing season, for whole armies of workers from the 
hills. Those were the glorious times when a man could ear n as much as twenty-five or thirty cents a day. The 
Quiché villages were rich: their fiestas were grand events and the more elaborate of their old dances were staged on 
a lavish scale; aguardiente flowed like water, and when a man needed a new suit of the traditional clothes he could 
afford to buy the hand-woven cloth, the richly patterned sashes and kerchiefs,  the hat bands and tassels. Today he 
has to think twice and three times before he renews his wa rdrobe. A new outfit will cost him the equivalent of four 
or five pounds, and at the present moment this is, for a Qu iché Indian, an enormous su m. At the local store the 
price of a suit of blue dungarees is only a few shillings, and when it is worn out, which it will be very soon, he will 
be able to afford to buy another. It looks, I am afraid, as though the traditional dress of the Indians were doomed. 
All the forces of industrialism are arra yed against it. Conservative prejudice  cannot long resist the assaults of 
economics.  
 Meanwhile a majority of highlanders  still wear the old cost umes -- a different one in every village. The 
most curious feature, for example, of the Sololà costume is the black varnished hat, wh ich is a strangely flattened 
version of John Bull's topper. From another village (I ne ver discovered which; but it cannot have been far from 
Sololà, for I saw several of its representatives at the market) came men in large mushroom-shaped hats, exactly like 
those worn by very distinguished old English ladies when  they go gardening. I had a slight shock each time I saw 
one of them. It was as though Miss Jeky ll had suddenly gone mad and taken to st aining her face with walnut juice 
and wearing, with her old hat, a gray monkey-jacket and white cotton pants. 
 The most remarkable thing about these Indian costumes is that they are not Indian  at all, but old European. 
Little scraps of seventeenth- and ei ghteenth-century Spain have been caught  here and miraculously preserved, like 
flies in the hard amber of primitive conservatism. The Chichicastenango Indians, for example, wear a short-waisted

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

31
embroidered jacket and knee-breeches of brown cloth, a gay woven sash and an embroidered kerchief tied round 
the head. It is, almost without modi fication, the costume of Sancho Panza. Elsewhere one finds a number of small 
variations on the Spanish theme. Thus, long kilts will so metimes be worn below a neatly tailored bullfighter's 
jacket -- a reminiscence, perhaps, of the loin-cloths of an earlier dispensation. 
 The women's dress has been much less profoundly affect ed by Spanish fashion than the men's. There is no 
sign here of the long trailing skirts and Lancashire-las sie shawls of the Mexicans. The Filipino lady's low-cut 
corsage and puffed sleeves, her white petticoat and coque ttishly looped-up skirt are unheard of. True, the Quiché 
women's embroidered bodices may have borrowed somethi ng from European peasant costume; but their short 
skirts, reaching in many cases only to the knee -- these are unquestionably Indian. Perhaps their color has changed 
since the conquest; for they are now dye d with indigo which was introduced by th e Spaniards. But the cut is surely 
the same as it was when Alvarado passed this way. 
 
 
 
Copan 
 
 We climbed into the plane and started off. The mist had all melted away and, in a little while, there below 
us, clear as a map, was the valley of Copan, narrow between hills, with its village, its fields of dust-colored stubble, 
its winding river, its tree-grown Ma ya acropolis rising sheer in a great wall from the water's edge. We came 
spiraling down. A small bald patch not fa r from the ruins was evidently the landi ng field. A herd of cows scattered 
in hysterical agitation as we descended. Avoiding these animals as best he could, and steering clear of the larger of 
the numerous rocks with which the airport was strewn, our pilot, who was fortunately a most skillful flyer, brought 
us safely to land. We stepped out and, accompanied by some  small boys who offered to be our guides, walked off 
to see the ruins. Our pilot took the road to the village; the local authorities would be anxious, he knew, to prove 
their importance by lengthily examining his paper. If he did not indulge them, they might turn savage. 
 Time and its allies in destruction, vegetation and weat her, play curious tricks on the works of man. A city 
left to their tender mercies is genera lly destroyed as an architectural and engineering whole, but spared in its 
decorative details. The great masses of masonry are buried and disrupted; tend, if the vegetation is strong, to vanish 
altogether, dissolved into their component  parts; the statues, the reliefs, the fragile pots and jewe ls survive, very 
often, almost intact. At Copan, for exam ple, a few mounds covered with trees, a wall here and there, some rubbish 
heaps of tumbled stones, are all that re main of the great complex of pyramids, of platforms, of walls and terraces, 
of sunken courtyards, which once occupied the site. Bu ried and, under the mold, disintegrated by the thrusting 
roots of the tropical vegetati on, a sacred city of pure geom etrical forms once stood here. Its sharp-edged planes of 
hewn stone, of white or painted stucco, shone smooth, like th e surfaces of a crystal, in the perpendicular sunlight. 
But toiling up and down through the scr ub, among the fallen stones, I found it all but impossible to reconstruct in 
my imagination the Mayas' huge embodiment of a math ematician's dream. I had read the writings of the 
archeologists and knew what sort of monument had been raised at Copan. But these almost shapeless barrows 
supplied my fancy with no visible foundations on which to rebuild the Mayas' prodigious works. Only the plastic 
decorations with which their mountains of solid geometry  had been incidentally tr immed were still there, in 
unequivocal existence, before my eyes. The whole had go ne; but a few of the ornamental parts remained. In a 
maize field at the foot of the woode d mounds -- the mounds were the acropo lis and principal pyramid, the maize 
field had been a great forum -- stood a group of magnificent stelae, floridly carved in such deep relief that the stone 
was sometimes pierced from side to side. Using neolithic  tools, the Maya sculptors had displayed an almost 
contemptuous mastery of their material; they had treated their twenty-foot monoliths as a Chinese craftsman might 
treat a piece of ivory. One is left bewildered by the spectacle of so much technica l accomplishment displayed by 
people having such inadequate technical resources. 
 The stelae are not Copan's only monu ments. Scrambling among the ruins, we found an astonishing wealth 
of carved stones. Here was a great cubic skull-symbol, its eye sockets glaring, its teeth deep in the grass and weeds; 
here, at the base of a broken wall, a dado of small death's heads in low relief; here the famous altar with its frieze of 
fantastically adorned astronomer-priests  in scientific conferen ce; here, carved in the round, a giant's head, 
grotesquely open-mouthed; here a pair of statues, broken, but still violently alive. The finest specimens of sculpture

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

32
in the round are no longer at  Copan. I saw nothing to compare in grac e, in plastic subtlety, in emotional 
expressiveness, with the tors o of the maize god at the British Museum, or  with the lovely head of the same god 
now at Boston. These two pieces and certain others in American museums, are stylistically so close to one another 
that one is tempted to think of them as the works of a single sculptor of outstanding ability. Of the other carvings in 
the round still at Copan, none exhibited th e kind of approach to reality exemplif ied in these extraordinary statues. 
The beauty of most Mayan sculpture is felt by us to be profoundly, incommensurably alien. But with this particular 
group of carvings from Copan one feels suddenly at hom e, on familiar emotional ground. The mind of the man, or 
men, who made them seems to have been  gifted with the same kind of sensib ilities as ours. Now that these works 
have been taken away, the European visitor at Copan enjoys no such comforting c onviction. He looks at the 
astonishing works around him, but looks at them from across a gulf; they ex ist in a universe of sentiment and 
discourse that is not his universe. Those colossal skulls, for example -- they have nothing to do with the macabre of 
our later middle ages, or the florid horrors of baroque sepulchral art. 
 
 The flesh is bruckle, the fiend is slee  
 Timor mortis conturbat me. 
 
 So wailed our ancestors. But I doub t if the Mayas were saying anything  of the kind. In these great cubic 
monoliths, adorned (with what an unerring sense of the significantly decorative effect!) with eye sockets, nose 
hole, teeth, one finds no tr ace of our European lament for transience, our personal terror of  extinction and decay. 
One finds -- what? Confronted by the extraordinary objects themselves one can only ask the question, not hope to 
answer it. It is impossible to know by personal experience what the people who made such things felt and thought. 
Each life has its own private logic, and the logics of all the lives of  people living at a given time, under a given 
cultural dispensation, have, at some poi nt, a certain resemblance among themse lves. The Mayas' life-logic was not 
the same as ours. The admiration with which we look at their works of art is tinged with a speculative 
incomprehension. What were they really up to? Quien sabe? 
(From Beyond the Mexique Bay) 
 
 
 
In a Tunisian Oasis 
 
 Waking at dawn, I looked out of the window. We were in the desert. On either side of the railway an 
immense plain, flat as Holland, but taw ny instead of green, stretched out inte rminably. On the horizon, instead of 
windmills, a row of camels was silhouetted against the gray sky. Mile after mile, the train rolled slowly southward. 
 At Tozeur, when at last we arrived, it had just finished raining -- for the first time in two and a half years -- 
and now the wind had sprung up; there was a sandstorm. A thick brown fog, whirled into eddies by the wind, gritty 
to the skin, abolished the landscape from before our smar ting eyes. We sneezed; there was sand in our ears, in our 
hair, between our teeth. It wa s horrible. I felt depressed, bu t not surprised. The weather is always horrible when I 
travel. 
 Once, in a French hotel, I was accused of having brought  with me the flat black bugs, of whose presence 
among my bedclothes I complained to a self-righteous propriet ress. I defended myself with energy against the 
impeachment. Bugs -- no; I am innocent of bugs. But when it comes to bad weather, I have to plead guilty. Rain, 
frost, wind, snow, hail, fog -- I bring them with me wher ever I go. I bring them to places where they have never 
been heard of, at seasons when it is im possible that they should occur. What delightful skating there will be in the 
Spice Islands when I arrive! On this particular journe y I had brought with me to ev ery place on my itinerary the 
most appalling meteorological calamities. At Naples, for example, it was the snow. Coming out of the theater on 
the night of our arriva l, we found it lying an inch d eep under the palm trees in the public gardens. And Vesuvius, 
next morning, glittered white, like Fujiyama, against th e pale spring sky. At Palermo there was a cloud-burst. 
"Between the Syrtes and soft Sicily " we passed through a tempest of hail, lightning and wind. At Tunis it very 
nearly froze. At Sousse the wind was so violent that the stiff board-like leaves of the cactuses swayed and trembled 
in the air like aspens. And now, on the day of our arrival at  Tozeur, it had rained for the first time in thirty months, 
and there was a sandstorm. No, I was not in the least surprised; but I could not help feeling a little gloomy.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

33
 Toward evening the wind somewhat abated; the sand be gan to drop out of the air. At midday the brown 
curtain had been unpenetrable at fift y yards. It thinned, grew gauzier; one could see objects at a hundred, two 
hundred yards. From the windows of the hotel bedroom in which we had sat all day, trying -- but in vain, for it 
came through even invisible crannies -- to escape from th e wind-blown sand, we could se e the fringes of a dense 
forest of palm trees, the dome of a little mosque, hous es of sun-dried brick and thin brown men in flapping 
nightshirts walking, with muffled faces and bent heads, against the wind, or riding, sometimes astride, sometimes 
sideways, on the bony rumps of patient little asses. Two ve ry professional tourists in sun helmets -- there was no 
sun -- emerged round the corner of a street. A malicious  gust of wind caught them unawares; simultaneously the 
two helmets shot into the air, thudded, rolled in the dus t. The too professional tourists scuttled in pursuit. The 
spectacle cheered us a little; we descended, we ventured out of doors. 
 A melancholy Arab offered to show us round the town. Knowing how hard it is to find one's way in these 
smelly labyrinths, we accepted his offer. His knowledge of  French was limited; so too, in consequence, was the 
information he gave us. He employed what I may call th e Berlitz method. Thus, when a column of whirling sand 
rose up and jumped at us round the corner of a st reet, our guide turned to us and said, pointing: "Poussière." We 
might have guessed it ourselves. 
 He led us interminably through narrow, many-cornered streets, between eyeless wa lls, half crumbled and 
tottering. 
 "Village," he explained. "Très plaisant." We did not altogether agree with him. 
 A walk through an Arab village is reminiscent of  walks through Ostia or Pompeii. Roman remains are 
generally in a better state of preservation, and cleaner; that is all. One is astonished to see, among these dusty ruins, 
white-robed families crouching over their repasts. 
 Our guide patted a brown mud wall. 
 "Briques," he said, and repeated the word several times, so that we might be certain what he meant. 
 These bricks, which are of sun-dried mud, are sometim es, on the façades of the more considerable houses, 
arranged in a series of simple and pleasing patterns -- diamonds, quincunxes, hexag ons. A local art which nobody 
now takes the trouble to pr actice -- nobody, that is, except the Europeans,  who, with characteri stic energy, have 
used and wildly abused the traditiona l ornamentation on the walls of the sta tion and the principal hotel. It is a 
curious and characteristic fact that, when ever in Tunisia one sees a particularly Oriental piece of ar chitecture, it is 
sure to have been built by the French, since 1881. The cathedral of Carthage, the law courts and schools of Tunis -- 
these are more Moorish than the Al hambra, Moorish as only Oriental te a-rooms in Paris or London can be 
Moorish. In thirty years the French ha ve produced buildings more typically and intensely Arabian than the Arabs 
themselves contrived to do in the course of thirteen centuries. 
 We passed into the market-place. 
 "Viande," said our guide, fingering as he passed a well-thumbed collop of mutton, lying among the dust and 
flies on a little booth. 
 We nodded. 
 "Très joli," commented our guide. "Très plaisant." Noisily he spat on the ground. The proprietor of the 
booth spat too. We hurried away; it needs time to grow inur ed to Tunisian habits. These frightful hoickings in the 
throat, these sibilant explosions and semi-liquid impacts are almost the national music of the country. 
 There are in the desert of southern Tunisia three gr eat oases. These are all of much the same size, each 
consisting of some six or seven thousand acres of cu ltivated ground, and are all three remarkable for their 
numerous and copious springs. In the middle of the dese rt, suddenly, a hundred fountains come welling out of the 
sand; rivers run, a network of little cana ls is dug. An innumerable forest of date palms springs up -- a forest whose 
undergrowth is corn and roses, vines and apricot trees,  olives and pomegranates, pepper trees, castor-oil trees, 
banana trees, every precious plant of th e temperate and the sub-tropical zones. No rain falls on these little Edens -- 
except on the days of my arrival -- but the springs, fed from who knows what  distant source, flow inexhaustibly 
and have flowed at least since Roman times. Islande d among the sands, their green luxuriance is a standing 
miracle. That it should have been in a desert, with here and there such isla nds of palm trees,  that Judaism and 
Mohammedanism took their rise is a thing which, since I have  seen an oasis, astonishes me. The religion which, in 
such a country, would naturally  suggest itself to me would be no abstract monotheism, but the adoration of life, of 
the forces of green and growing nature. In an oasis, it seems to me, the wo rship of Pan and of the Great Mother

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

34
should be celebrated with an almost desperate earnestness. The nymphs of water and of trees ought surely, here, to 
receive a passionate gratitude. In the desert, I should infallibly have inve nted the Greek mythology. The Jews and 
the Arabs discovered Jahweh and Allah. I find it strange. 
 Of the three great Tunisian oases, my favorite is Ne fta. Gabes runs it close for beauty, while the proximity 
of the sea gives it a charm which Nefta lacks. But, on the other hand, Gabes is less fertile than Nefta and, socially, 
more sophisticated. There must be the best part of two hundred Europeans living at Gabes. There is dancing once a 
week at the hotel. Gabes is quite the lit tle Paris. The same objection applies to Tozeur, which has a railway station 
and positively teems with French officials. Nefta, with fourteen thousand Arabs, has a white population of a dozen 
or thereabouts. A hundred Frenchmen can always make a Paris; twelve, I am happy to say, cannot. The only non-
Arabian feature of Nefta is its hotel, which is clean, co mfortable, French and efficient. At Nefta one may live 
among barbarians, in the Middle Ages, and at the same t une, for thirty francs a day, enjoy the advantages of 
contemporary Western civilization. What could be more delightful? 
 We set off next morning by car, across the desert. Every now and then we passed a camel, a string of 
camels. Their owners walked or rode on asses beside  them. The womenfolk were perched among the baggage on 
the hump -- a testimony, most eloquent  in this Mohammedan country, to th e great discomfort of camel riding. 
Once we met a small Citroën lorry, crammed to overflowing with white-robed Arabs. In the Sahara, the automobile 
has begun to challenge the supremacy of  the camel. Motor buses now ply acro ss the desert. A line, we were told, 
was shortly to be inaugurat ed between Nefta and Touggourt, across tw o hundred kilometers of sand. In a few 
years, no doubt, we shall all have visited Lake Tchad and Timbuctoo. Should one be glad or sorry? I find it 
difficult to decide. 
 The hotel at Nefta is a long lo w building, occupying one whole side of the market-square. From your 
bedroom window you watch the Arabs living;  they do it unhurriedly and with a dignified inefficiency. Endlessly 
haggling, they buy and sell. The vendor offers a mutton c hop, slightly soiled; the buyer professes himself outraged 
by a price which would be exorbitant if the goods were spot lessly first-hand. It takes them half an hour to come to 
a compromise. On the ground white bundles doze in the sun; when the sun grows too hot, they roll a few yards and 
doze again in the shade. The notables of the town, the rich pr oprietors of palm trees, stroll  past with the dignity of 
Roman senators. Their garments are of the finest wool; th ey carry walking sticks; they  wear European shoes and 
socks, and on their bare brown calves -- a little touch entirely char acteristic of the real as  opposed to the literary 
East -- pale mauve or shell-pink sock suspenders. Wild men ride in from the desert. Some of them, trusting to 
common sense as well as Allah to preserve them fr om ophthalmia, wear smoked motor goggles. With much 
shouting, much reverberant thumping of dus ty, moth-eaten hides, a string of cam els is driven in. They kneel, they 
are unloaded. Supercilious and haughty, they turn this way and that, like the dowagers of very aristocratic families 
at a plebeian evening party. Then, all at once, one of them st retches out its long neck limply along the ground and 
shuts its eyes. The movement is one of hopeless weariness; the grotesque animal is sudde nly pathetic. And what 
groanings, what gurglings in the thro at, what enormous sighs when their masters begin to reload them! Every 
additional package evokes a bubbling protes t, and when at last they have to rise from their knees, they moan as 
though their hearts were broken. Blind beggars sit patiently awaiting the alms they never receive. Their raw eyelids 
black with flies, small children play contentedly in the dust. If Allah wills it, they too will be blind one day: blessed 
be the name of Allah. 
 Sitting at our window, we watch the spectacle. And at night, after a pink and yellow sunset with silhouetted 
palm trees and domes against the sky (for my taste, I am  afraid, altogether too like  the colored plates in the 
illustrated Bible), at night huge stars come out in the indi go sky, the cafés are little caves of yellow light, draped 
figures move in the narrow streets with lanterns in th eir hands, and on the flat roofs of the houses one sees the 
prowling shadows of enormous watchdogs. There is silence, the si lence of the desert: fr om time to time there 
comes to us, very distinctly, the distant sound of spitting. 
 Walking among the crowds of the market-place or along the narrow labyrinthine streets, I was always 
agreeably surprised by the apathetically courteous aloofne ss of Arab manners. There are beggars in plenty, of 
course, hawkers, guides, cab drivers; and when you pass, th ey faintly stir, it is true, from their impassive calm. 
They stretch out hands, they offer Arab antiquities of th e most genuine German manuf acture, they propose to take 
you the round of the sights, th ey invite you into their fly- blown vehicles. But they do al l these things politely and 
quite uninsistently. A single refusal suffices to check thei r nascent importunity. You shake your head; they relapse

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

35
once more into the apathy from which your appearance momentarily roused them -- resignedly: nay, almost, you 
feel, with a sense of relief that it ha d not, after all, been necessary to dist urb themselves. Coming from Naples, we 
had been particularly struck by this le thargic politeness. For in Naples the beggars claim an alms noisily and as 
though by right. If you refuse to ride, the cabmen of Po zzuoli follow you up the road, alternately cursing and 
whining, and at every hundred yards reducing their price by yet another ten per cent. The guides at Pompeii fairly 
insist on being taken; they cry aloud, they show their certificates, they enumerate their wives and starving children. 
As for the hawkers, they simply w ill not let you go. What, you don't want co lored photographs of Vesuvius? Then 
look at these corals. No corals? But here is the last wo rd in cigarette holders. You do not smoke? But in any case, 
you shave; these razor blades, now. . . You shake your head. Then toothpicks, magnifying glasses, celluloid combs. 
Stubbornly, you continue to refuse. The hawker plays his last card -- an ace, it must be admitted, and of trumps. He 
comes very close to you, he blows garlic and alcohol confidentially into your face. From an inner pocket he 
produces an envelope; he opens it, he presses the contents into your hand. You may not want corals or razor blades, 
views of Vesuvius or celluloid combs; he admits it. But can you honestly say -- hones tly, with your hand on your 
heart -- that you have no use for por nographic engravings? And for nothing, si r, positively for nothing. Ten francs 
apiece; the set of twelve for a hundred. . . 
 The touts, the pimps, the mendican ts of Italy are the energetic memb ers of a conquering, progressive race. 
The Neapolitan cabman is a disciple of Samuel Sm iles; the vendors of pornographi c post cards and the sturdy 
beggars live their lives with a stren uousness that would have earned the comm endation of a Roosevelt. Self-help 
and the strenuous life do not flourish on the other shore of the Mediterranean. In Tunisi a the tourist walks abroad 
unpestered. The Arabs have no future. 
 That they might still have a future if they change d their philosophy of life must  be obvious to anyone who 
has watched the behavior of Arab child ren, who have not yet had time to be  influenced by the prevailing fatalism 
of Islam. Arab children are as lively, as inquisitive, as  tiresome and as charming as the children of the most 
progressively Western people. At Nefta the adult beggars and donkey driv ers might leave us, resignedly, in peace; 
but the children were unescapable. We could never stir abroad without finding a little troop of them frisking around 
us. It was in vain that we tried to drive them away; they accompanied us, whether we liked it or no, on every walk, 
and, when the walk was over, claimed wages for their importunate fidelity. 
 To provide tourists with guidance they did not need -- this, we found, was the staple profession of the little 
boys of Nefta. But they had other and more ingenious  ways of making money. Clos e and acute observers of 
tourists, they had made an important psychological discovery about  this curious race of beings. Foreigners, they 
found out, especially elderly female foreigners, have a preposterous tenderness for animals. The little boys of Nefta 
have systematically exploited this discovery. Their methods, which we had frequent opportunities of observing, are 
simple and effective. In front of the hotel a gang of little ruffians is perpetually on the watch. A tourist shows 
himself, or herself, on one of the balc onies: immediately the general of the troop -- or perhap s it would be better to 
call him the director of the company, fo r it is obvious that  the whole affair is organi zed on a strictly business 
footing -- runs forward to within easy coin-tossing distance. From some where about his person he produces a 
captive bird -- generally some  brightly colored little creature not unlik e a goldfinch. Smiling up at the tourist, he 
shows his prize. "Oiseau," he explains in his pidgin French. When the tourist has been made to understand that the 
bird is alive, the little boy proceeds, w ith the elaborate gestures of a conjurer, to pretend to wring its neck, to pull 
off its legs and wings, to pluck out its feathers. For a tender-hearted tourist the menacing pantomime is unbearable. 
 "Lâche la bête. Je te donne dix sous." 
 Released, the bird flaps ineffectually away, as well as its clipped wings will permit. In actual fact, we 
observed, they never did their victims any harm. A bird, it was obvious, was far too valuable to be lightly killed; 
goldfinches during the tourist season la id golden eggs. Besides, they were re ally very nice little boys and fond of 
their pets. When they saw that we had seen through their trick and could not be induced to pay ransom, they 
grinned up at us without malice and knowingly, as though we were their accomp lices, and carefully put the birds 
away. 
 The importunity of the littl e boys was tiresome when one wanted to be  alone. But if one ha ppened to be in 
the mood for it, their company was exceedingly entert aining. The exploitation of the tourists was a monopoly 
which the most active of the children had arrogated, by force and cunning, to themselves. There was a little gang of 
them who shared the loot and kept co mpetitors at a distance. By the time we  left, we had got to know them very

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

36
well. When we walked abroad, small strangers tried to join  our party; but they were savagely driven away with 
shouts and blows. We were private prope rty; no trespassing was tolerated. It was only by threatening to stop their 
wages that we could persuade the capta ins of the Nefta tourist industry to desist from persecuting their rivals. 
There was one particularly charming little boy -- mythically  beautiful, as only Arab children can be beautiful -- 
who was the object of their special fury. The captains of the tourist industry were ugly: they dreaded the rivalry of 
this lovely child. And they were right; he was irresistible. We insisted on his being permitted to accompany us. 
 "But why do you send him away?" we asked. 
 "Lui méchant," the captains of industry replied in their rudimentary French. "Lui casser un touriste." 
 "He smashed a tourist?" we repeated in some astonishment. 
 They nodded. Blushing, even the child himself seemed reluctantly to admit the tr uth of their accusations. 
We could get no further explanations; none of them knew enough French to give them. "Lui méchant. Lui casser 
un touriste." That was all we could discover. The lovely child l ooked at us appealingly. We decided to run the risk 
of being smashed and let him come with us. I may add that we came back from all our walks quite intact. 
 Under the palm trees, through that labyrinth of paths and running streams, we wandered interminably with 
our rabble of little guides. Most often it was to that part of the oasis called the Corbeille that we went. At the 
bottom of a rounded valley, theater-sha ped and with smooth steep sides of sand, a score of springs suddenly gush 
out. There are little lakes, jade green like those pools ben eath the cypresses of the Villa  d'Este at Tivoli. Round 
their borders the palm trees go jetting up, like fountains fixed in their upward aspiri ng gesture, their drooping 
crown of leaves a green spray arrested on the point of  falling. Fountains of life -- and five yards away the smooth 
unbroken slopes of sand glare in the sun. A little river flows out from the lakes, at first between high banks, then 
into an open sheet of water where the children paddle and bathe, the beasts come down to drink, the women do 
their washing. The river is the main road in this part of th e oasis. The Arabs, when they want to get from place to 
place, tuck up their nightshirts and wade . Shoes and stockings, not to menti on the necessity for keeping up their 
dignified prestige, do not permit Europeans to follow their example. It is only on mule-back that Europeans use the 
river road. 
 A fertile oasis possesses a characteristic color scheme of its own, which is entirely unlike that of any 
landscape in Italy or the nort h. The fundamental note is struck by the palm s. Their foliage, except where the stiff 
shiny leaves metallically reflect the light, is a rich bl ue-green. Beneath them, one walks in a luminous aquarium 
shadow, broken by innumerable vivid shafts of sunlight th at scatter gold over the ground or, touching the trunks of 
the palm trees, make them shine a pale ashy pink through the subaqueous shadow. There is pink, too, in the glaring 
whiteness of the sand beyond the fringes of the oasis. Under the palms, beside the brow n or jade-colored water, 
glows the bright emerald green of corn or the deciduous tr ees of the north, with here and there the huge yellowish 
leaves of a banana tree, the smoky gray of olives, or the bare bone-white and writhing form of a fig tree. 
 As the sun gradually sinks, the aqua rium shadow beneath the palm trees grows bluer, denser; you imagine 
yourself descending through layer after darkening layer of wate r. Only the pale skeletons of the fig trees stand out 
distinctly; the waters gleam like eyes in the dark ground; the ghost of a little marabout or chapel shows its domed 
silhouette, white and strangely definite in the growing darkness, through a gap in the trees. But looking up from the 
depths of this submarine twilight, one s ees the bright pale sky of  evening, and against it, still touched by the level, 
rosily-golden light, gleaming as though tr ansmuted into sheets of precious meta l, the highest leaves of the palm 
trees. 
 A little wind springs up; th e palm leaves rattle toge ther; it is suddenly cold. "En avant," we call. Our little 
guides quicken their pace. We follow them through the darken ing mazes of the palm forest, out into the open. The 
village lies high on the desert  plateau above the oasis, de sert-colored, like an arid ou tcrop of the tawny rock. We 
mount to its nearest gate. Through passage-ways between bl ank walls, under long dark tunnels the children lead us 
-- an obscure and tortuous way which we never succeeded in thoroughly mastering -- back to the square market-
place at the center of the town. The window s of the inn glimmer invitingly. At the door we pay off the captains of 
industry and the little tourist-smasher; we enter. Within the hotel it is provincial France. 
(From "In a Tunisian Oasis," The Olive Tree)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

37
Miracle in Lebanon 
 
 In one of the northern suburbs of Beirut there stands an  ugly little Armenian c hurch, to which, in the 
ordinary course of ev ents, no tourist would ever dream of going. But in this month of May, 1954, the course of 
events had not been ordinary. The sight we had come to see was a miracle. 
 It had happened two or three days before. In the niche where, between services, the communion chalice was 
kept, a patch of light had appeared on the stone. There was no sunbeam to acc ount for it, no indication, so we were 
assured, that the stone cont ained any phosphorescent or fluorescent substan ce. And yet the fact remained that, for 
the last few days, a soft glow had appeared every morn ing, persisted all day and faded out at night. For the 
Armenians, I suppose, the miracle clearly  demonstrated how right their father s had been to reject the competing 
orthodoxies of Rome and Byzantium in favor  of the doctrine that, after his baptis m (but not before), Christ's flesh 
consisted of ethereal fire and "was not subject to the ordinary phenomena of digestion, secretions and evacuations." 
For the rest of us, it was either a hoa x, or an ordinary event in  an unusual context, or el se one of those delightful 
anomalies which distress the right-thinking scientist by actually turning up, every now and then, in all their 
mysterious pointlessness, and refusing to be explained away. 
 The church, when we arrived, was thronged, I was going to say, with pilg rims -- but the wo rd (at least in 
this present age of unfaith and, therefore, religious earnestness) calls up ideas of devotion; and of devotion, or even 
of decorum, there were no signs. But if these people we re no pilgrims, in our non-Ch aucerian sense of the term, 
neither were they mere sightseers. Curiosity was certainly  one of their motives, but not, it was clear, the only or 
strongest one. What had brought most of them to the church  was a form of self-interest.  They had come there, as 
the forty-niners came to California, in search of sudde n profit -- a horde of spiritu al prospectors looking for 
nuggets of mana, veins of twenty-two-carat good luck, something, in a word, for nothing. 
 Something for nothing -- but, conc retely, what? When crowds close in on a movie star, they can beg 
autographs, steal handkerchiefs and fountain pens, tear off pieces of his or he r garments as relics. Similarly, in the 
Middle Ages persons dying in the odor of  sanctity ran the risk, when their bodi es lay in state, of being stripped 
naked or even dismembered by  the faithful. Clothing would be cut to ribbons, ears cropped, hair  pulled out, toes 
and fingers amputated, nipples snipped off and carried home as amulets. But here, unfortuna tely, there was no 
corpse; there was only light, and light is intangible. You cannot slice off an inch  of the spectrum and put it in your 
pocket. The people who had come to exploit this Comsto ck Lode of the miraculous found themselves painfully 
frustrated; there was nothing here that th ey could take away with them. For all practical purposes, the glow in the 
niche was immaterial. Then, ha ppily for all concerned, a young woman noticed  that, for some reason or other, one 
of the chandeliers, suspended from the ceiling of the church, was wet. Dr ops of rather dirty water were slowly 
forming and, at lengthening intervals,  falling. Nobody supposed that there wa s anything supernatural about the 
phenomenon; but at least it was taking place in a supern atural context. Moreover the water on the chandelier 
possessed one immense advantage over the light in the niche: it was tangible as  well as merely visible. A boy was 
hoisted onto the shoulders of  a tall man. Handkerchiefs were  passed up to him, moistened in the oozings of the 
lamp and then returned to their owners, made happy now  by the possession of a charged fetish, capable, no doubt, 
of curing minor ailments, restoring lost potency and mediating prayers for success in love or business. 
 But "the search for the miraculous" (to use Ouspensky' s phrase) is not invariably  motived by self-interest. 
There are people who love truth for its  own sake and are ready, like the f ounders of the Society for Psychical 
Research, to seek it at the bottom of even the muddiest, smelliest wells. Much more widespread than the love of 
truth is the appetite for ma rvels, the love of the Phony an sich, in itself and for its own sw eet sake. There is also a 
curious psychological derangement, a ki nd of neurosis, sometimes mild, sometimes severe, which might be called 
"The Cryptogram-Secret Society Syndrome. " What fun to be an initiate! How delicious to feel the paranoid glow 
which accompanies the consciousness of belonging to the innermost circle, of being one of the superior and 
privileged few who know, for example, that  all history, past, presen t and future, is written into the stones of the 
Great Pyramid; that Jesus, like Madame  Blavatsky, spent seven years in Tibe t; that Bacon wrote all the works of 
Shakespeare and never died, merely vani shed, to reappear a century later as  the Comte de Saint-Germain, who is 
still living either (as Mrs. Annie Besa nt was convinced) in a Central European  castle, or else, more probably, in a 
cave, with a large party of Lemurians, near the top of Mount Shasta; alternatively, that Bacon did die and was 
buried, not (needless to say) in what the vulgar regard as his tomb, but at Williamsburg, Virginia, or, better still, on

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

38
an island off the coast of California, n ear Santa Barbara. To be privy to such  secrets is a high, rare privilege, a 
distinction equivalent to that of being Mr. Rockefeller or a Knight of the Garter. 
 Esoteric phantasies about Fourth Dynasty monuments , sixteenth-century lawyers and eighteenth-century 
adventurers are harmless. But when practical politicians and power seekers go in for esotericism, the results are apt 
to be dangerous. Whether Fascist or revolutionary, ev ery conspiratorial group has its quota of men and women 
afflicted by the Cryptogram-Secret Society Syndrome. Nor is this all. The intelligence services of every 
government are largely staffed by persons  who (in happier circumstances or if their temperament were a little 
different), would be inoffensively engaged in hunting for Tibetan Masters, proving that the English are the Lost 
Ten Tribes, celebrating Black Masses or (the favorite o ccupation of Charles Williams's more eccentric characters) 
intoning the Tetragrammaton backwards. If these neurotic s could be content to play the cloak-and-dagger game 
according to the rules of patriotism, all would be, re latively speaking, well. But the history of espionage 
demonstrates very clearly that many compulsive esotericis ts are not content to belong  to only one Secret Society. 
To intensify their strange f un, they surreptitiously work for the enemy as well as th eir own gang, and end, in a 
delirium of duplicity, by doublecrossing everyone. The bor n secret agent, the man who positively enjoys spying, 
can never, because he is a neurotic, be relied upon. It may well be that a nation's actual s ecurity is in inverse ratio 
to the size of its security forces. The greater the number of its secret agents and hush-hush men, the more chances 
there are of betrayal. 
 But let us get back to our miracle. "What do you thi nk of it?" I asked our Lebane se companion. He stroked 
his black beard, he smiled, he shrugge d his shoulders in expressive sile nce. Being himself a professional 
thaumaturge -- trained by the dervishes to lie on beds of nails, to go into catalepsy, to perform feats of telepathy, to 
send people into hypnotic trance by simply touching a point on the neck or back -- he knew how hard a man must 
work if he would acquire even the most trifling of paranormal powers. His skepticism in regard to amateur wonder-
workers and spontaneous miracles was complete and unshakable. 
 A queue had formed at the foot of the altar steps. We got into line a nd shuffled slowly forward to get our 
peep, in due course, into the niche. That I personally sa w nothing was the fault, not of the chalice, but of my own 
poor eyesight. To my companions and everyone else the glow  was manifest. It was an Ar menian miracle; but even 
Maronites, even Uniats, even Moslems and Druses had to admit that something had happened. 
 We made our way toward the door. Perched on the tall man's shoulders, the boy was still busy at his task of 
turning handkerchiefs into relics. In the sacristy picture postcards of the chalice and the illuminated niche were 
already on sale. 
 In Edward Conze's admirable account of Buddhism* there is a striking passage on the historical, and 
perhaps psychologically inevitable relati onship between spirituality and supersti tion, between the highest form of 
religion and the lowest. "Historically,"  Conze notes, "the display of supe rnatural powers and the working of 
miracles were among the most potent cau ses of the conversion of tribes and individuals to Bud dhism." Even the 
most "refined and intellectual" of Buddhists "would be inclined to think that a belief in miracles is indispensable to 
the survival of any spiritual life. In Europe, from the eighteenth century onwards, the conviction that spiritual 
forces can act on material events has given way to a belief in  the inexorable rule of natural law. The result is that 
the experience of the spiritual has become more and mo re inaccessible to modern society. No known religion has 
become mature without embracing both the spiritual and the magical. If it rejects the sp iritual, religion becomes a 
mere weapon to dominate the world. . . Such was the case in Nazism and in modern Japan. If, however, religion 
rejects the magical side of  life, it cuts itself off from the living forces of the world to such an  extent that it cannot 
bring even the spiritual side of man to  maturity." Buddhism (like Christianity  in its heyday) has combined "lofty 
metaphysics with adherence to the most commonly accepted superstitions of mankind. The Prajnaparamita text 
tells us that 'perfect wisdom can be attained only by the complete and total extinction of self-interest.' And yet, in 
the same texts, this supreme spiritual wisdom is 'recommend ed as a sort of magical tali sman or lucky amulet.'. . . 
Among all the paradoxes with which the history of Buddhism pr esents us this combination of spiritual negation of 
self-interest with magical subservience to self-interest is perhaps one of the most striking." 
 
* See pp. 84 ff. of Buddhism, Its Essence and Development by Edward Conze, Preface by  Arthur Waley. New York, 
Philosophical Library, 1951. 
 
 The same paradox is to be found in Christianity. The my stical spirituality of the fourteenth century had as

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

39
its background and context the system of ideas which called into existence such men as Chaucer's Pardoner and the 
preacher who, in the Decameron, tours the country exhibiting a tail feather of the Holy  Ghost. Or consider the 
flowering, three centuries later, of Fren ch spirituality in Charles de Condren and Olier, in Lallemant and Surin and 
Mme. de Chantal. These worshipers in spirit of a God who is Spirit were contemporary with and, in Surin's case, 
deeply involved in the most hideous mani festations of devil-centered supersti tion. White sand is  clean, but sterile. 
If you want a herbaceous border, you must mulch your soil with  dead leaves and, if possible, dig in a load of dung. 
Shall we ever see, in religion, the equivalent of hydr oponics -- spiritual flowers growing, without benefit of 
excrement or decay, in a solution of pure love and understanding?  I devoutly hope so, but , alas, have my doubts. 
Like dirtless farming, dirtless spirituality is likely to remain, for a long time, an exception. The rule will be dirt and 
plenty of it. Occult dirt, bringing forth, as usual, a few mystical flowers and a whole crop of magicians, priests and 
fanatics. Anti-occult dirt -- the dirt of  ideological and technological supersti tion -- in which personal frustrations 
grow like toadstools in the dark thickets of political tyranny. Or else (and this will be the ultimate horror) a mixture 
of both kinds of dirt, fertil e in such monstrosi ties as mediumistic commissars, cl airvoyant engineers, NKVD's and 
FBI's equipped with ESP as well as walky-talkies and concealed microphones. 
(From "Miracle in Lebanon," Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow) 
 
 
 
LOVE, SEX, 
AND PHYSICAL BEAUTY 
 
 
 
Beauty in 1920 
 
 To those who know how to read the si gns of the times it will have become apparent, in the course of these 
last days and weeks, that th e Silly Season is close upon us. Al ready -- and this in July with the menace of three or 
four new wars grumbling on the thunderous horizon -- alre ady a monster of the deep has appeared at a popular 
seaside resort. Already Mr. Louis McQuilland has launched in the Daily Express a fierce onslaught on the younger 
poets of the Asylum. Already the picture-papers are more  than half-filled with photogr aphs of bathing nymphs -- 
photographs that make one understand the ease with  which St. Anthony rebuffed his temptations. The 
newspapermen, ramping up and down like wolves, seek th eir prey wherever they may find it; and it was with a 
unanimous howl of delight that the w hole Press went pelting after the hare  started by Mrs. Asquith in a recent 
installment of her autobiography. Feebly and belatedly, let me follow the pack. 
 Mrs. Asquith's denial of beauty to the daughters of the twentieth century has proved a god-sent giant 
gooseberry. It has necessitated the cal ling in of a whole host of skin-food specialists, portrait-painters and 
photographers to deny this far from soft impeachment. A gr eat deal of space has been agreeably and inexpensively 
filled. Every one is satisfied, public, editors, skin-food specialists and all. But by far the most interesting 
contribution to the debate was a pictorial one, which appeared, if I remember rightly, in the Daily News. Side by 
side, on the same page, we were shown the photographs of three beauties of the eighteen-eighties and three of the 
nineteen-twenties. The comparison was most instructive. For a great gulf separates the two types of beauty 
represented by these two sets of photographs. 
 I remember in If, one of those charming conspi racies of E. V. Lucas and George Morrow, a series of 
parodied fashion-plates entitled "If Faces  get any Flatter. Last year's standar d, this year's Evening Standard." The 
faces of our living specimens of beauty have grown flatte r with those of their fashion-plate sisters. Compare the 
types of 1880 and 1920. The first is steep-faced, almost Ro man in profile; in the contemporary beauties the face 
has broadened and shortened, the profile  is less noble, less imposing, more appealingly, more alluringly pretty. 
Forty years ago it was the aris tocratic type that was appreciated; t oday the popular taste has shifted from the 
countess to the soubrette. Photography c onfirms the fact that th e ladies of the 'eightie s looked like Du Maurier 
drawings. But among the present young generation one looks in  vain for the type; the Du Maurier damsel is as 
extinct as the mesozoic reptile; the Fish girl and other kindred flat-faced species have taken her place.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

40
 Between the 'thirties and 'fifties a nother type, the egg-faced girl, reigne d supreme in the affections of the 
world. From the early portraits of Queen Victoria to the fashion-plates in the Ladies' Keepsake this invariable type 
prevails -- the egg-shaped face, th e sleek hair, the swan-like neck, the round, champagne-bottle shoulders. 
Compared with the decorous impassivity of the oviform gi rl our flat-faced fashion-pl ates are terribly abandoned 
and provocative. And because one expects so much in the way of respectability from these egg-faces of an earlier 
age, one is apt to be shocked when one sees them conduc ting themselves in ways that seem unbefitting. One thinks 
of that enchanting picture of Etty's, "Youth on the Prow and Pleasure at the Helm." The naiads are of the purest 
egg-faced type. Their hair is sleek, their shoulders slope and their faces are impassive as blanks. And yet they have 
no clothes on. It is almost indecent; one imagined that the egg-faced type  came into the world complete with 
flowing draperies. 
 It is not only the face of beauty  that alters with the changes of  popular taste. The champagne-bottle 
shoulders of the oviform girl have vanished from the modern fashion-plate a nd from modern life. The 
contemporary hand, with its two middle fingers held togeth er and the forefinger and little finger splayed apart, is 
another recent product. Above all, the feet have changed. In the days of th e egg-faces no fashion-plate had more 
than one foot. This rule will, I think, be found invariable. That solitary f oot projects, generally in a strangely 
haphazard way as though it had nothing to do with a leg, fr om under the edge of the skirt. And what a foot! It has 
no relation to those provocative feet in Suckling's ballad: 
 
 Her feet beneath her petticoat  
 Like little mice stole in and out.  
 
It is an austere foot. It is a small,  black, oblong object like a tea-leaf. No liv ing human being has ever seen a foot 
like it, for it is utterly unlike the feet of nineteen-twent y. Today the fashion-plate is always a biped. The tea-leaf 
has been replaced by two feet of rich baroque design, curved  and florid, with insteps like the necks of Arab horses. 
Faces may have changed shape, but feet have altered fa r more radically. On the text, "the feet of the young 
women," it would be possible to write a profound philosophical sermon. 
 And while I am on the subject of feet I would lik e to mention another curious phenomenon of the same 
kind, but affecting, this time, the standa rds of male beauty. Examine the pictor ial art of the eighteenth century, and 
you will find that the shape of the male leg is not what it was. In those days the calf of the leg was not a muscle that 
bulged to its greatest dimensions a little below the back of the knee, to subside, decrescendo, toward the ankle. No, 
in the eighteenth century the calf was an even crescent, with its greatest projection opposite the middle of the shin; 
the ankle, as we know it, hardly existed. This curious calf is forced upon one's atte ntion by almost every minor 
picture-maker of the eighteenth century, and even by some of the great masters, as, for instance, Blake. How it 
came into existence I do not know. Presumably the crescen t calf was considered, in th e art schools, to approach 
more nearly to the Platonic Idea of the human leg than di d the poor distorted Appearance of real life. Personally, I 
prefer my calves with the bulge at the top and a proper ankle at the bottom. But then  I don't hold much with the 
beau idéal. 
 The process by which one type of beauty becomes popular, imposes its tyranny fo r a period and then is 
displaced by a dissimilar type is a mysterious one. It may be that patient historical scholars will end by discovering 
some law to explain the transformation of the Du Maurier type into the flat -face type, the tea-l eaf foot into the 
baroque foot, the crescent calf into the normal calf. As far as  one can see at present, these changes seem to be the 
result of mere hazard and arbitrary choice. But a time will doubtless come when it will be found that these changes 
of taste are as ineluctably predetermined as any chemi cal change. Given the South African War, the accession of 
Edward VII and the Liberal triumph of 1906, it was, no dou bt, as inevitable that Du Maurier should have given 
place to Fish as that zinc subjected to  sulphuric acid should break up into ZnSO 4+H2. But we leave it to others to 
formulate the precise workings of the law. 
(From On the Margin) 
 
 
 
Fashions in Love

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

41
 Human nature does not change, or, at  any rate, history is too short for any changes to be perceptible. The 
earliest known specimens of ar t and literature are still comp rehensible. The fact that we can understand them all 
and can recognize in some of them an unsurpassed artistic excellence is proof enough that not only men's feelings 
and instincts, but also their intellectua l and imaginative powers, were in the re motest times precisely what they are 
now. In the fine arts it is only the convention, the form, th e incidentals that change: the fundamentals of passion, of 
intellect and imagination remain unaltered. 
 It is the same with the ar ts of life as with the fine arts. Conventions and traditions, prejudices and ideals and 
religious beliefs, moral systems and codes of good manners, varying accordi ng to the geographical  and historical 
circumstances, mold into different forms the unchanging material of human instinct, passion, and desire. It is a 
stiff, intractable material -- Egyptian granite, rather than  Hindu bronze. The artists who carved the colossal statues 
of Rameses II may have wished to represent the Pharaoh standing on one leg and waving two or three pairs of arms 
over his head, as the Indians still repres ent the dancing Krishna. But with the be st will in the world they could not 
have imposed such a form upon the granite. Similarly, t hose artists in social life  whom we call statesmen, 
moralists, founders of religions, have of ten wished to mold human nature into forms of superhuman elegance; but 
the material has proved too stubborn for them, and they have had to be content w ith only a relatively small 
alteration in the form which their pred ecessors had given it. At any given hist orical moment human behavior is a 
compromise (enforced from without by law and custom, from  within by belief in religious or philosophical myths) 
between the raw instinct on the one ha nd and the unattainable ideal on the other -- a compromise, in our sculptural 
metaphor, between the unshaped block of stone and the many-armed dancing Krishna. 
 Like all the other great human activ ities, love is the product of unchang ing passions, instincts, and desires 
(unchanging, that is to say, in the mass of humanity; for, of course, they vary greatly in quantity and quality from 
individual to individual), and of laws  and conventions, beliefs and ideals, which the circumstances of time and 
place, or the arbitrary fiats of great personalities, have imposed on a more or  less willing society. The history of 
love, if it were ever written (and doubtless some learned German, unread, alas, by me, has written it, and in several 
volumes), would be like the current histories of art -- a r ecord of succeeding "styles" and "schools," of 
"influences," "revolutions," "technical  discoveries." Love's psychological and physiological material remains the 
same; but every epoch treats it in a different manner, just as every epoch cuts its unvarying cloth and silk and linen 
into garments of the most diverse fashion. By way of  illustration, I may mention th at vogue of homosexuality 
which seems, from all accounts, to have  been universal in the Hellenic world. Plutarch attributes the inception of 
this mode to the custom (novel in the fifth century, accordin g to Thucydides) of exercising naked in the palestra.* 
But whatever may have been its origin, there can be no doubt  that this particular fashion in love spread widely 
among people who were not in the leas t congenitally disposed to homose xuality. Convention and public opinion 
molded the material of love into fo rms which a later age has chosen to call "unnatural. " A recrudescence of this 
amorous mode was very noticeable in Europe during the years immediately follo wing the War. Among the 
determining causes of this recrudescence a future Plut arch will undoubtedly number the writings of Proust and 
André Gide. 
 
* Plutarch, who wrote some five hundred years after the event, is by no means an unquestionable authority. The habit of 
which he and Thucydides speak may have fa cilitated the spread of the homosexual fa shion. But that the fashion existed 
before the fifth century is made sufficiently clear by Homer, not  to mention Sappho. Like many modern oriental peoples, the 
ancient Greeks were evidently, in Sir Richard Burton's expressive phrase, "omnifutuent." 
 
 The present fashions in love are not so definite and universal as those in clothes. It is as though our age 
were dubiously hesitating between crinol ines and hobble skirts, trunk hose and Oxford trousers. Two distinct and 
hostile conceptions of love co exist in the minds of men and women, two se ts of ideals, of conventions, of public 
opinions, struggle for the right to mold the psychological an d physiological material of love. One is the conception 
evolved by the nineteenth century out of the ideals of Ch ristianity on the one hand and romanticism on the other. 
The other is that still rather inchoa te and negative conception which contem porary youth is in process of forming 
out of the materials provided by modern psychology. The public opinion, the conventi ons, ideals, and prejudices 
which gave active force to the first conve ntion and enabled it, to some extent at least, to modify the actual practice 
of love, had already lost much of thei r strength when they were rudely shat tered, at any rate in the minds of the 
young, by the shock of the War. As usually happens, practi ce preceded theory, and the new conception of love was

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

42
called in to justify existing post-War manners. Having gain ed a footing, the new conception is now a cause of new 
behavior among the youngest adolescent generation, instead of  being, as it was for the generation of the War, an 
explanation of war-time behavior made after the fact. 
 Let us try to analyze these two coexisting and conflicti ng conceptions of love. The older conception was, as 
I have said, the product of Ch ristianity and romanticism -- a curious mixture of contradictions, of the ascetic dread 
of passion and the romantic worship of passion. Its idea l was a strict monogamy, su ch as St. Paul grudgingly 
conceded to amorous humanity, sanctified and made eterna l by one of those te rrific exclusive passions which are 
the favorite theme of poetry and drama. It is an ideal whic h finds its most characteristic expression in the poetry of 
that infinitely respectable rebel, th at profoundly anglican worshiper of passi on, Robert Browning. It was Rousseau 
who first started the cult of passion for passion's sake. Before his time the great passions, such as that of Paris for 
Helen, of Dido for Æneas, of Paolo and Francesca for one anot her, had been regarded rather as disastrous maladies 
than as enviable states of soul. Rousseau, followed by all the romantic poets of Fr ance and England, transformed 
the grand passion from what it had been in the Middle Ag es -- a demoniac possession -- into a divine ecstasy, and 
promoted it from the rank of a disease to that of the only true and natural form of love. The nineteenth-century 
conception of love was thus doubly mys tical, with the mysticism of Christia n asceticism and sacramentalism, and 
with the romantic mysticism of Nature. It claimed an ab solute rightness on the grounds of its divinity and of its 
naturalness. 
 Now, if there is one thing that the study of histor y and psychology makes abundantly clear, it is that there 
are no such things as either "divine"  or "natural" forms of love. Innumerab le gods have sanctioned and forbidden 
innumerable kinds of sexual behavior, and innumerable phi losophers and poets have advocated the return to the 
most diverse kinds of "natur e." Every form of amorous behavior, from chastity and monogamy to promiscuity and 
the most fantastic "perversions," is found both among anim als and men. In any given hu man society, at any given 
moment, love, as we have seen, is th e result of the interac tion of the unchanging inst inctive and physiological 
material of sex with the local conventions of morality and religion, the local laws, prejudices, and ideals. The 
degree of permanence of these conventions , religious myths, and ideals is propor tional to their soci al utility in the 
given circumstances of time and place. 
 The new twentieth-century conception of love is realisti c. It recognizes the diversity of love, not merely in 
the social mass from age to age, but from individual to  contemporary individual, acco rding to the dosage of the 
different instincts with which each is born, and the upb ringing he has received. The new generation knows that 
there is no such thing as Love with a large L, and that wh at the Christian romantics of the last century regarded as 
the uniquely natural form of love is , in fact, only one of th e indefinite number of po ssible amorous fashions, 
produced by specific circumstances at th at particular time. Psychoanalysis has taught it that all the forms of sexual 
behavior previously regarded as wicked, perverse, unnatu ral, are statistically norma l (and normality is solely a 
question of statistics), and that what is commonly called amorous normality is far from being a spontaneous, 
instinctive form of behavior, but must be acquired by a process of education. Having contracted the habit of talking 
freely and more or less scie ntifically about sexual matte rs, the young no longer regard lo ve with that feeling of 
rather guilty excitement and thrilling shame which was for an earlier generation the normal reaction to the subject. 
Moreover, the practice of bi rth-control has robbed amorous indulgence of most of the sinf ulness traditionally 
supposed to be inherent in it by robbing it of its socially disast rous effects. The tree sh all be known by its fruits: 
where there are no fruits, there is obvi ously no tree. Love has ceas ed to be the rather fearful, mysterious thing it 
was, and become a perfectly normal, almost commonplace, activity -- an activity, for many young people, 
especially in America, of the same na ture as dancing or tennis, a sport, a recreation, a pastime. For those who hold 
this conception of love, liberty and toleration are prime necessities. A strenuous offensive against the old taboos 
and repressions is everywhere in progress. 
 Such, then, are the two conceptions of love which oppose one another today. Which is the better? Without 
presuming to pass judgment, I will content myself with pointing out the defects of each. The older conception was 
bad, in so far as it inflicted unnecessary and undeserv ed sufferings on the many human beings whose congenital 
and acquired modes of love-making did not conform to the fashionable Christian-romantic pattern which was 
regarded as being uniquely entitled to call itself Love. Th e new conception is bad, it se ems to me, in so far as it 
takes love too easily and lightly. On love regarded as an amusement the last word is surely this of Robert Burns:

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

43
 I waive the quantum of the sin, 
      The hazard of concealing;  
 But oh! it hardens all within 
      And petrifies the feeling.  
 
Nothing is more dreadful than a cold, unimpassione d indulgence and love infallibly becomes cold and 
unimpassioned when it is too lightly made. It is not good, as Pascal remarked, to have too much liberty. Love is the 
product of two opposed forces -- of an  instinctive impulsion and a social resistance acting on the individual by 
means of ethical imperatives justified by philosophical or religious myths. When, with the destruction of the myths, 
resistance is removed, the impulse wast es itself on emptiness; and love, which is only the product of conflicting 
forces, is not born. The twentieth centur y is reproducing in a new form the e rror of the early ni neteenth-century 
romantics. Following Rousseau, the romantics imagined that exclusive passion was the "natural" mode of love, just 
as virtue and reasonableness were the "natural" forms of men's social behavior. Get rid of priests and kings, and 
men will be for ever good and happy; poor Shelley's faith in  this palpable nonsense remained unshaken to the end. 
He believed also in the complementary paralogism that you  had only to get rid of soci al restraints and erroneous 
mythology to make the Grand Passion unive rsally chronic. Like the Mussets a nd Sands, he failed to see that the 
Grand Passion was produced by the restraints that opposed them selves to the sexual impulse, just as the deep lake 
is produced by the dam that bars the pa ssage of the stream, and the flight of  the aeroplane by the air which resists 
the impulsion given to it by the motor. There would be no ai r-resistance in a vacuum; but  precisely for that reason 
the machine would not leave the ground, or even move at all. Where ther e are no psychological or external 
restrains, the Grand Passion does not come into existence and must be artificially cultivated, as George Sands and 
Musset cultivated it -- with what painfu l and grotesque results the episode of Venice made only too ludicrously 
manifest. 
 "J'aime et je veux pâlir; j'aime et je veux souffrir,"  says Musset, with his usual hysterically masochistic 
emphasis. Our young contemporaries do not wish to suffer or grow pale; on the contrary, they have a most 
determined desire to grow pink and en joy themselves. But too much enjoymen t "blunts the fine point of seldom 
pleasure." Unrestrained indulgence kills not merely passion, but, in the end, even amusement. Too much liberty is 
as life-destroying as too much restraint. The present fashion in love-making is likely to be short, because love that 
is psychologically too easy is not interesting. Such, at any rate, was evidently the opinion of the French, who, bored 
by the sexual license produced by the Na poleonic upheavals, reverted (so far, at any rate, as the upper and middle 
classes were concerned) to an almo st anglican strictness un der Louis-Philippe. We may anticipate an analogous 
reaction in the not distant future. What new or what revived mythology will serve to create those internal restraints 
without which sexual impulse cannot be transformed into love? Christian morality and ascetic ideals will doubtless 
continue to play their part, but there will no less certainly  be other moralities and ideals. For example, Mr. D. H. 
Lawrence's new mythology of nature (new in its expression , but reassuringly old in subs tance) is a doctrine that 
seems to me fruitful in possibilities.  The "natural love" which he sets up as a norm is a passion less self-conscious 
and high-falutin, less obviously and precariously artificial, than that "natural love" of the romantics, in which 
Platonic and Christian notions were e ssential ingredients. The restraints  which Mr. Lawrence would impose on 
sexual impulse, so as to transform it into love, are not the restraints of religious spirituality. They are restraints of a 
more fundamental, less artificial natu re -- emotional, not inte llectual. The impulse is to be restrained from 
promiscuous manifestlations because, if it were not, promis cuity would "harden all within  and petrify the feeling." 
The restraint is of the same personal nature as the impulse . The conflict is between a part of the personality and the 
personality as an organized whole. It  does not pretend, as the romantic and Christian conflict pr etends, to be a 
battle belween a diabolical Lower Self and certain tr anscendental Absolutes, of  which the only thing that 
philosophy can tell us is that they ar e absolutely unknowable, and therefore, for our purposes , nonexistent. It only 
claims to be, what in fact it is, a psychological conflict laking place in the more or less known and finite world of 
human interests. This doctrine has seve ral great advantages over pr evious systems of inward  restraint. It does not 
postulate the existence of any transcendental, non-human  entity. This is a merit which will be increasingly 
appreciated as the significance of Kant's and Nietzsche's de structive criticism is more widely realized. People will 
cease to be interested in unknowable absolutes; but they w ill never lose interest in their own personalities. True, 
that "personality as a whole," in whose interests the sexua l impulse is to be restrained and turned into love, is, 
strictly speaking, a mythological figure. Consisting, as we do, of a vast colony of souls -- souls of individual cells,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

44
of organs, of groups of organs, hunger-souls, sex-souls, power-souls, herd-souls, of whose multifarious activities 
our consciousness (the Soul with a large S) is only very  imperfectly and indirectly aware -- we are not in a position 
to know the real nature of our personality as a whole. The only thing we can do is to hazard a hypothesis, to create 
a mythological figure, call it Human Personality, and hope that circumstances will not, by destroying us, prove our 
imaginative guesswork too hopelessly wrong. But myth for my th, Human Personality is pr eferable to God. We do 
at least know something of Human Personality, whereas of God we know  nothing and, knowing nothing, are at 
liberty to invent as freely as we like. If men had always tried to deal with the problem of love in terms of known 
human rather than of grotesquely imagined divine interests, there would have been less "making of eunuchs for the 
kingdom of heaven's sake," less persecution of "sinne rs," less burning and imprisoning of the heretics of 
"unnatural" love, less Grundyism, less Co mstockery, and, at the same time, less dirty Don-Juanism, less of that 
curiously malignant and vengeful love-making so characteri stic of the debauchee unde r a Christian dispensation. 
Reacting against the absurdities of th e old mythology, the young have  run into absurdities no less inordinate at the 
other end of the scale. A sordid and ignoble realism offe rs no resistance to the sexual impulse, which now spends 
itself purposelessly, without producing love, or even, in the long-run, amusement, wit hout enhancing vitality or 
quickening and deepening the rhythms of living. Only a new mythology of nature, such as, in modern times, Blake, 
Robert Burns, and Lawrence have defined it, an untransce ndental and (relatively speaki ng) realistic mythology of 
Energy, Life, and Human Personality, will provide, it seems to me, the inward resistances necessary to turn sexual 
impulse into love, and provide them in a form which the critical intelligence of Post-Nietzschean youth can respect. 
By means of such a conception a new fashion in love may be created, a mode more beautiful and convenient, more 
healthful and elegant, than any seen among men since the days of remote and pagan antiquity. 
(From Do What You Will) 
 
 
 
Sermons in Cats 
 
 I met, not long ago, a young man who aspired to become  a novelist. Knowing that I was in the profession, 
he asked me to tell him how he should set to work to re alize his ambition. I did my best to explain. "The first 
thing," I said, "is to buy quite  a lot of paper, a bo ttle of ink, and a pen. After that you merely have to write." But 
this was not enough for my young friend. He seemed to have a notion that there was some sort of esoteric cookery 
book, full of literary recipes, which you had only to follow attentively to become a Dickens, a Henry James, a 
Flaubert -- "according to taste," as the authors of recipe s say, when they come to the question of seasoning and 
sweetening. Wouldn't I let him have a glimpse of this cooke ry book? I said that I was sorry, but that (unhappily -- 
for what an endless amount of time and trouble it would sa ve!) I had never even seen such a work. He seemed 
sadly disappointed; so, to console the poor lad, I advised him to apply to the professors of dramaturgy and short-
story writing at some reputable university; if any one possessed a trustworthy cookery book of literature, it should 
surely be they. But even this was not enough to satisfy the young man. Disappointed in his hope that I would give 
him the fictional equivalent of "One Hundred Ways of Cooking Eggs" or the "Carnet de la Ménagère," he began to 
cross-examine me about my methods of "collecting materi al." Did I keep a notebook or a daily journal? Did I jot 
down thoughts and phrases in a card-index? Did I systema tically frequent the drawi ng-rooms of the rich and 
fashionable? Or did I, on the contrary, inhabit the Sussex downs? or spend my evenings looking for "copy" in East 
End gin-palaces? Did I think it was wi se to frequent the company of inte llectuals? Was it a good thing for a writer 
of novels to try to be well educated, or should he confin e his reading exclusively to other novels? And so on. I did 
my best to reply to these questions -- as non-committall y, of course, as I could. And as the young man still looked 
rather disappointed, I volunteered a final piece of advice, gratuitously. "M y young friend," I said, "if you want to 
be a psychological novelist and write about  human beings, the best thing you can do is to keep a pair of cats." And 
with that I left him. 
 I hope, for his own sake, that he took my advice. Fo r it was good advice -- the fruit of much experience and 
many meditations. But I am afraid that, being a rather f oolish young man, he merely laughe d at what he must have 
supposed was only a silly joke: laughed, as I myself foolishly laughed when, y ears ago, that charming and talented 
and extraordinary man, Ronald Firbank, on ce told me that he wanted to write  a novel about life in Mayfair and so

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

45
was just off to the West Indies to look for copy among the Negroes. I laughed at the time; but I see now that he was 
quite right. Primitive people, like children and animals, are simply civilized people with the lid off, so to speak -- 
the heavy elaborate lid of manners, conventions, traditions  of thought and feeling ben eath which each one of us 
passes his or her existence. This lid can  be very conveniently studied in Mayf air, shall we say, or Passy, or Park 
Avenue. But what goes on underneath the lid in these polis hed and elegant districts? Direct observation (unless we 
happen to be endowed with a very penetr ating intuition) tells us but little; and, if we cannot infer what is going on 
under other lids from what we see, intr ospectively, by peeping under our own, then the best th ing we can do is to 
take the next boat for the West Indi es, or else, less expensively, pass a few mornings in the nursery, or 
alternatively, as I suggested to my literary young friend, buy a pair of cats. 
 Yes, a pair of cats. Siamese by preference; for they are certainly the most "human" of all the race of cats. 
Also the strangest, and, if not the most beautiful, certainly the most striking and fantastic. For what disquieting pale 
blue eyes stare out from the black velvet mask of their faces! Snow-white at birth, their bodies gradually darken to 
a rich mulatto color. Their forepaws are gloved almost  to the shoulder like the long black kid arms of Yvette 
Guilbert; over their hind legs are tightly drawn the black s ilk stockings with which Félicien Rops so perversely and 
indecently clothed his pearly nudes. Their tails, when they have tails -- and I w ould always recommend the 
budding novelist to buy the tailed variety; for the tail, in cat s, is the principal organ of  emotional expression and a 
Manx cat is the equivalent of a dumb man -- their tails are tapering black serpents endowed, even when the body 
lies in Sphinx-like repose, with a spas modic and uneasy life of their own. And what strange voices they have! 
Sometimes like the complaining of small children; someti mes like the noise of lambs; sometimes like the agonized 
and furious howling of lost souls. Co mpared with these fantastic creature s, other cats, however beautiful and 
engaging, are apt to seem a little insipid. 
 Well, having bought his cats, nothing remains for the would-be novelist but to wa tch them living from day 
to day; to mark, learn, and inwardly digest the lessons about human nature which they teach; and finally -- for, alas, 
this arduous and unpleasant necessity always arises -- finally write his book about Mayfair, Passy, or Park Avenue, 
whichever the case may be. 
 Let us consider some of these in structive sermons in cats, from which the student of human psychology can 
learn so much. We will begin -- as every good novel should begin, instead of absurdly ending -- with marriage. The 
marriage of Siamese cats, at any rate as I have observed it, is an extraordinarily dramatic event. To begin with, the 
introduction of the bridegroom to his br ide (I am assuming that, as usually ha ppens in the world of  cats, they have 
not met before their wedding day) is th e signal for a battle of unparalleled ferocity. The young wife's first reaction 
to the advances of her would-be husband is to fly at his throat. One is thankful, as one watches the fur flying and 
listens to the piercing yells of rage and hatred, that a kindly pr ovidence has not allowed th ese devils to grow any 
larger. Waged between creatures as big as men, such battles would bring death and destruction to everything within 
a radius of hundreds of yards. As things are, one is able, at  the risk of a few scratches,  to grab the combatants by 
the scruffs of their necks and drag them, still writhing and spitting, apart. What would happen if the newly-wedded 
pair were allowed to go on fighting to the bitter end I do not know, and have never had th e scientific curiosity or 
the strength of mind to try to find out. I suspect that, co ntrary to what happened in Hamlet's family, the wedding 
baked meats would soon be serving for a funeral. I have always prevented th is tragical consummation by simply 
shutting up the bride in a room by herself and leaving th e bridegroom for a few hours to languish outside the door. 
He does not languish dumbly; but for a long time there is no answer, save an occasional hiss or growl, to his 
melancholy cries of love. When, finally, the bride begins replying in tones as soft and yearning as his own, the door 
may be opened. The bridegroom darts in and is received, not with tooth and claw as on the former occasion, but 
with every demonstration of affection. 
 At first sight there would seem, in this specimen of  feline behavior, no special "message" for humanity. But 
appearances are deceptive; the lids under which civilized people live are so thic k and so profusely sculptured with 
mythological ornaments, that it is difficult to recognize th e fact, so much insisted upon by D. H. Lawrence in his 
novels and stories, that there is almost always a mingling of hate with the passion of love and that young girls very 
often feel (in spite of their sentimen ts and even their desires)  a real abhorrence of th e fact of physical love. 
Unlidded, the cats make manifest this ordinarily obscure  mystery of human nature. After witnessing a cats' 
wedding no young novelist can rest content with the falseh ood and banalities which pass, in current fiction, for 
descriptions of love.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

46
 Time passes and, their honeymoon over, the cats begin to tell us things about humanity which even the lid 
of civilization cannot conceal in the wo rld of men. They tell us -- what, al as, we already know -- that husbands 
soon tire of their wives, part icularly when they are expecting or nursing families; that the essence of maleness is 
the love of adventure and in fidelity; that guilty consciences and good resolutions  are the psychological symptoms 
of that disease which spasmodically a ffects practically every ma le between the ages of eighteen and sixty -- the 
disease called "the morning after"; and that with the disappearance of the di sease the psychological symptoms also 
disappear, so that when temptation comes again, consci ence is dumb and good resoluti ons count for nothing. All 
these unhappily too familiar truths are illustrated by the cats with a most comical absence of disguise. No man has 
ever dared to manifest his boredom so insolently as does a Siamese tomcat, when he yawns in the face of his 
amorously importunate wife. No man has ever dared to pr oclaim his illicit amours so frankly as this same tom 
caterwauling on the tiles. And how slinkingly -- no man was ever so abject -- he returns next day to the conjugal 
basket by the fire! You can measure th e guiltiness of his consci ence by the angle of his back-pressed ears, the 
droop of his tail. And when, having sniffed him and so di scovered his infidelity, his wife, as she always does on 
these occasions, begins to scratch his face (already scarred, like a German st udent's, with the traces of a hundred 
duels), he makes no attempt to resist; for, self-convicted of sin, he knows that he deserves all he is getting. 
 It is impossible for me in the space  at my disposal to enumerate all th e human truths which a pair of cats 
can reveal or confirm. I will cite only one more of the innumerable sermons in cats which my memory holds -- an 
acted sermon which, by its ludicrous pantomime, vividly brought home to me the most saddening peculiarity of our 
human nature, its irreducible solitariness. The circumstances were thes e. My she-cat, by now a wife of long 
standing and several times a mother, was passing throug h one of her occasional phases of amorousness. Her 
husband, now in the prime of life and para ding that sleepy arrogance which is th e characteristic of the mature and 
conquering male (he was now the feline equivalent of some herculean young Alcibiades of the Guards), refused to 
have anything to do with her. It was in  vain that she utte red her love-sick mewing, in vain that she walked up and 
down in front of him rubbing herself voluptuously against doors and chairlegs as she passed, it was in vain that she 
came and licked his face. He shut his eyes, he yawned, he  averted his head, or, if she became too importunate, got 
up and slowly, with an insulting air of dignity and de tachment, stalked away. When  the opportunity presented 
itself, he escaped and spent the next twenty-four hours up on the tiles. Left to herself, the wife went wandering 
disconsolately about the house, as though in search of a vanished happiness,  faintly and plaintively mewing to 
herself in a voice and with a manner that reminded one irresistibly of Mélisande in Debussy's opera. "Je ne suis pas 
heureuse ici," she seemed to be saying. And, poor little beast, she wasn't. But, like her big sisters and brothers of 
the human world, she had to bear her unhappiness in so litude, uncomprehended, unconsoled. For in spite of 
language, in spite of intelligence and intuition and sympathy, one can never really communicate anything to 
anybody. The essential substance of every thought and feeling remains incommunicable, locked up in the 
impenetrable strong-room of the individual soul and body. Our life is a sentence of perpetual solitary confinement. 
This mournful truth was overwhelmingl y borne in on me as I watched the abandoned and love-sick cat as she 
walked unhappily round my room. "Je ne suis pas heureuse ici," she kept mewing, "je ne suis pas heureuse ici." 
And her expressive black tail would lash  the air in a tragical gesture of de spair. But each time it twitched, hop-la! 
from under the armchair, from behind the book-case, wher ever he happened to be hiding at the moment, out 
jumped her only son (the only one, that is, we had not give n away), jumped like a ludicrous toy tiger, all claws out, 
on to the moving tail. Sometimes he would miss, sometimes  he caught it, and getting the tip between his teeth 
would pretend to worry it, absurdly fero cious. His mother would have to jerk it violently to get it out of his mouth. 
Then, he would go back under his armchair again and, crouching down, his hindquarters trembling, would prepare 
once more to spring. The tail, the tragical, despairingly ge sticulating tail, was for him the most irresistible of 
playthings. The patience of the moth er was angelical. There wa s never a rebuke or a puniti ve reprisal; when the 
child became too intolerable, she just moved away; that was all. And meanwhile, all the time, she went on mewing, 
plaintively, despairingly. "Je ne suis pas heureuse ici, je ne suis pas heureuse ici." It was heartbreaking. The more 
so as the antics of the kitte n were so extraordinar ily ludicrous. It was as though a slap-stick comedian had broken 
in on the lamentations of Mélisande -- not mischievously, not  wittingly, for there was not the smallest intention to 
hurt in the little cat's performance, but simply from lack of comprehension. Each was alone serving his life-
sentence of solitary confinement. There was no communi cation from cell to cell. Absolutely no communication. 
These sermons in cats can be exceedingly depressing.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

47
(From Music at Night) 
 
Appendix 
 
 Every civilization is, among other things, an arrangeme nt for domesticating the passions and setting them to 
do useful work. The domestication of sex presents a problem whose solution must be attempted on two distinct 
levels of human experience, the psycho-physiological and the social. On the social level the relations of the sexes 
have everywhere been regulated by law, by uncodified custom, by taboo and re ligious ritual. Hundreds of volumes 
have been filled with accounts of these regulations, and it  is unnecessary to do more than mention them in passing. 
Our present concern is with the problem of domesticating sex at the source, of  civilizing its manifestations in the 
individual lover. This is a subject to which, in our Western tradition, we have paid much too little attention. Indeed, 
it is only in very recent years that, thanks to the declini ng influence of the Judaeo-Christian ethic, we have been 
able to discuss it realistically. In th e past the problem used to be dealt wi th in one or other of three equally 
unsatisfactory ways. Either it was not mentioned at all, with the result that adolescents coming to maturity were left 
to work out their sexual sa lvation, unassisted, within th e framework of the prevaili ng, and generally barbarous 
socio-legal system. Or else it was mentioned -- but me n ioned on the one hand with obscene delight or obscene 
disapproval (the tone of th e pornographers and the Puritan moralists), or with a vague and all too "spiritual" 
sentimentality (the tone of the trouba dours, Petrarchians and romantic lyrists). Today we are condemned neither to 
silence, nor obscenity, nor sentimentality; we are at liberty, at  last, to look at the facts and to ask ourselves what, if 
anything, can be done about them. One of the best ways of discovering what can be done is to look at what has 
been done. What experiments have been made in this field, and how successful have they been? 
 I shall begin not at the faraway beginning of ever ything, among the Trobriander s, for example, or the 
Tahitians, but rather at the beginning of our own current ph ase of civilization -- in the mi ddle years, that is to say, 
of the nineteenth century. 
 Victoria had been on the throne for seven year s when, in 1844, John Humphrey Noyes published his book, 
Bible Communism. (It is worth remarking that, for the American  public of a hundred year s ago, Communism was 
essentially biblical. It was preached  and practiced by men and women who wanted to emulate the earliest 
Christians. The appeal was not to Marx's Manifesto -- still unpublished when Noyes wrote his book -- but to the 
Acts of the Apostles.) In the fourth chapter of Bible Communism and again, at greater length, in his Male 
Continence, written more than twenty years later, Noyes set fo rth his theories of sex and described the methods 
employed by himself and his followers for transforming a wild, God-eclipsing passion into a civilized act of 
worship, a prime cause of crime and misery into a source  of individual happiness,  social solidarity and good 
behavior. 
 "It is held in the world," Noyes writes in Bible Communism, "that the sexual organs have two distinct 
functions -- viz: the urinary and the propagative. We affirm that they ha ve three -- the urinary, the propagative and 
the amative., i.e. they are conductors first of the urine, secondly of the semen and thirdly of the social magnetism. . 
." After Mrs. Noyes had come dangerously  near to death as the result of rep eated miscarriages, Noyes and his wife 
decided that, henceforth, their sexual relationships should be ex clusively amative, not pr opagative. But how were 
the specifically human aspects of se x to be detached from the merely biological? Confronted  by this question, 
Robert Dale Owen had advocated coitus interruptus; but Noyes had read his Bible and had no wish to emulate 
Onan. Nor did he approve of contracep tives -- "those tricks," as he calle d them, "of the French voluptuaries." 
Instead he advocated Male Continence and what Dr. Stockham was later to call Karezza. With the most exemplary 
scientific detachment he began by "analyzing the act of sexual intercourse. It has a beginning, a middle and an end. 
Its beginning and most elementary form is the simple pr esence of the male organ in the female." Presence is 
followed by motion, motion by crisis. But now "suppose the ma n chooses to enjoy not onl y the simple presence, 
but also the reciprocal motion, and yet to stop short of the crisis. . . If you say that this is impossible, I answer that I 
know it is possible -- nay, that it is easy." He knew because he himself had done it. "Beginning in 1844, I 
experimented on the idea" (the idea that the amative f unction of the sexual organs could be separated from the 
propagative) "and found that the self-control it required is not difficult; also that my enjoyment was increased; also 
that my wife's experience was very satisfactory, which it had never been before; also that we had escaped the 
horrors and the fear of involuntary propagation." Noyes was a born prophet,  a missionary in the bone. Having

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

48
made a great discovery, he felt impelled to bring the good news to others -- and to bring it, what was more, in the 
same package with what he believed to be true Christ ianity. He preached, he made disciples, he brought them 
together in a community, first in Vermont and later at Oneida, in upstate New York. "Religion," he declared, "is the 
first interest, and sexual morality the second in the great enterprise of establishing the Kingdom of God on earth." 
At Oneida the religion was Perfectionist Christianity and the sexual morality was based upon the psycho-
physiological practices of Male Continence and the social law of Complex Marriage. Like all earlier founders of 
religious communities, Noyes disapproved of exclusive a ttachments between the memb ers of his group. All were 
to love all, unpossessively, with a ki nd of impersonal charity which, at On eida, included sexual relationships. 
Hence the establishment, within the community, of Complex Marriage. Noyes di d not condemn monogamy; he 
merely believed that group love was be tter than exclusive love. "I would not,"  he wrote, "set up a distinction of 
right and wrong between general and speci al love, except that special love, wh en false, makes more mischief. I 
insist that all love, whether general or  special, must have its authority in the sanction and the inspiration of the 
ascending fellowship. All love that is at work in a privat e corner, away from the general circulation, where there 
are no series of links connecting it with God, is false love; it rends and devours, instead of making unity, peace and 
harmony." At Oneida there was to be no love in a privat e corner, no idolatrous and God-eclipsing attachment of 
one for one, outside the general circulation. Each was marri ed to all; and when any given pair decided (with the 
advice and permission of the Elders) to  consummate their latent nuptials, Ma le Continence guaranteed that their 
union should be fruitful only of "social magnetism." Love was for love's sake and for God's, not for offspring. 
 The Oneida Community endured for thirty years and its members, fr om all accounts, were excellent 
citizens, singularly happy and measurably less neurotic than most of their Victorian contemporaries. The women of 
Oneida had been spared what one of Noyes's lady correspondents described as "the miseries of Married Life as it is 
in the World." The men found their self-d enial rewarded by an experience, at onc e physical and spiritual, that was 
deeper and richer than that of unres trained sexuality. Here is the comment  of a young man who had lived in the 
community and learned the new Art of Love. "This Yankee nation," he wrote to  Noyes, "claims to be a nation of 
inventors, but this discovery of Male  Continence puts you, in my mind, at the head of all inventors." And here are 
Noyes's own reflections on the psychological, social and religious significance of hi s discovery. "The practice 
which we propose will advance civilizati on and refinement at railroad speed. Th e self-control, retention of life and 
advance out of sensualism, which mu st result from making freedom of love  a bounty on the chastening of sensual 
indulgence, will at once raise the race to new vigor and beauty, moral and physical. A nd the refining effects of 
sexual love (which are recognized mo re or less in the world) will be increased a hundredfold when sexual 
intercourse becomes a method of ordinary conversation and each becomes married to all." Furthermore, "in a 
society trained in these principles, amative intercourse will have its place among the "fine arts." Indeed, it will take 
rank above music, painting, sculpture, etc.; for it combines the charms and benefits of them all. There is as much 
room for cultivation of taste and skill in this department as  in any." And this is not all. Sexual love is a cognitive 
act. We speak -- or at least we used to speak -- of carnal knowledge. This knowledge is of a kind that can be 
deepened indefinitely. "To a true hear t, one that appreciates God, the same woman is an endless mystery. And this 
necessarily flows from the first admi ssion that God is unfathomable in dept hs of knowledge and wisdom." Male 
Continence transforms the sexual act into a prolonged exchange of "social magnetism"; and this prolonged 
exchange makes possible an ever deepening knowledge of  the mystery of human natu re -- that mystery which 
merges ultimately, and becomes one with the mystery of Life itself. 
 Noyes's conception of the sexual act (when properly performed) as at once a religious sacrament, a mode of 
mystical knowledge and a civilizing social discipline has its counterpart in Tantra. In the twenty-seventh chapter of 
Sir John Woodroffe's Shakti and Shakta the interested reader will find a brief account of the Tantrik's sexual ritual, 
together with a discussion of the philosophy which underlie s the practice. "Nothing in natural function is low or 
impure to the mind which recognizes it as Sh akti and the working of Shakti. It is  the ignorant and, in a true sense, 
vulgar mind which regards any natural function as low or coarse . The action in this case is seen in the light of the 
inner vulgarity of mind. . . Once the reality of the world as grounded in the Absolute is established, the body seems 
to be less an obstacle to freedom; for it is a form of that self-same Absolute." In Tantra the sexual sacrament 
borrows the method of Yoga, "not to frustrate, but to regulate enjoyment. Conversely enjoyment produces Yoga by 
the union of body and spirit. . . Here are made one Yoga  which liberates and Bhoga which enchains." In Hindu 
philosophy (which is not philosophy in the modern Western sense of the wo rd, but rather the description and

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

49
tentative explanation of a praxis aimed at the transformation of huma n consciousness), the relations between body, 
psyche, spirit and Divine Ground are described in terms of a kind of occult physiology, whos e language comes 
nearer to expressing the unbroken continui ty of experience, from the "lowest" to the "highest," than any hitherto 
devised in the West. "Coition, " in terms of this occult physiology, "is the union of the Shakti Kundalini, the 'Inner 
Woman' in the lowest centre of the Sadhaka's body with  the Supreme Shiva in the highest centre in the upper 
Brain. This, the Yogini Tantra says, is the best of all uni ons for those who are Yati, th at is, who have controlled 
their passions."* 
 
* Male Continence, sex as a sacrament and coitus as a long -drawn cognitive exchange of "social magnetism" have been 
discussed in contemporary medical terms by Dr. Rudolf von Urban whose book Sexual Perfection and Marital Happiness is 
one of the most significant modern contributions to the solution of an age-old problem. 
 
 In the West the theory and practi ce of Tantra were never orthodox, except perhaps during the first centuries 
of Christianity. At this time it was common for ecclesiastics and pious laymen to have "spiritual wives," who were 
called Agapetae, Syneisaktoi or Virgines Subintroductae. Of the precise relationships between these spiritual wives 
and husbands we know very little; but it  seems that, in some cases at least,  a kind of Karezza, or bodily union 
without orgasm, was practiced as a religious exercise, leading to valuable spiritual experiences. 
 For the most part, Noyes's predecessors and the Chri stian equivalents of Tantra must be sought among the 
heretics -- the Gnostics in the first centuries of our era,  the Cathars in the early Middle Ages and the Adamites or 
Brethren and Sisters of the Free Spirit from the later thirteenth century onwards. In his monograph on The 
Millennium of Hieronymus Bosch Wilhelm Franger has brought together much interesting material on the 
Adamites. They practiced, we learn, a modum specialem coeundi, a special form of intercourse, which was 
identical with Noyes's Male Continence or the coitus reservatus permitted by Roman Catholic casuists. This kind 
of sexual intercourse, they declared, was known to Adam before the Fa ll and was one of the constituents of 
Paradise. It was a sacramental act of charity and, at the sa me time, of mystical cogniti on, and, as such, was called 
by the Brethren acclivitas-- the upward path. According to  Aegidius Cantor, the leader of the Flemish Adamites in 
the first years of the fifteenth century, "the natural sexual act can take place in such a manner that it is equal in 
value to a prayer in the sight  of God." A Spanish follower of the Adamite he resy declared, at his trial that "after I 
had first had intercourse with  her [the prophetess, Francisca Hernandez] for some twenty days, I could say that I 
had learned more wisdom in Valladolid than if I had studi ed for twenty years in Paris. For not Paris, but only 
Paradise could teach such wisdom." Like Noyes and his followers, the Adamites practiced a form of sexual 
communism, and practiced it not, as their enemies declar ed, out of a low taste for orgiastic promiscuity, but 
because Complex Marriage was a method by which every me mber of the group could love  all the rest with an 
impartial and almost impersonal charity; could see and nuptially know in each beloved partner the embodiment of 
the original, unfallen Adam -- a godlike son or daughter of God. 
 Among literary testimonials to Male Continence, perh aps the most elegant is a little poem by Petronius. 
Long and inevitably disgusting experience had taught this arbiter of the elegan cies that there must be something 
better than debauchery. He found it in physical tenderness and the peace of soul which such tenderness begets. 
 
 Foeda est in coitu et brevis voluptas, 
 et taedet Veneris statim peractae. 
 Non ergo ut pecudes libidinosae 
 caeci protinus irruamus illuc; 
 nam languescit amor peritque flamma; 
 sed sic sic sine fine feriati 
 et tecum jaceamus osculantes. 
 Hic nullus labor est ruborque nullus; 
 hoc juvit, juvat et diu juvabit; 
 hoc non deficit, incipitque semper.  
 
Which was Englished by Ben Jonson, as follows: 
 
 Doing, a filthy pleasure is, and short; 
 And done, we straight repent us of the sport;

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

50
 Let us not then rush blindly on unto it, 
 Like lustful beasts that only know to do it; 
 For lust will languish, and that heat decay. 
 But thus, thus, keeping endless holiday, 
 Let us together closely lie and kiss; 
 There is no labor, nor no shame in this; 
 This hath pleased, doth please and long will please; never 
 Can this decay, but is beginning ever.  
 
 And here, from a novelist and poet of a very different kind is a passage th at hints at what is revealed by 
physical tenderness, when it is prolonged by Male Continence  into a quasi-mystical experience. "She had sunk to a 
final rest," Lawrence writes, near the end of The Plumed Serpent, [By D. H. Lawrence. New York, Knopf, 1926.]  
"within a great opened-out cosmos. The universe had opened out to her, new and vast, and she had sunk to the deep 
bed of pure rest. . . She reali zed, almost with wonder, the death in her of th e Aphrodite of the foam: the seething, 
frictional, ecstatic Aphrodite. By a swift dark instinct, Cipria no drew away from this in her. When, in their love, it 
came back on her, the seething electric female ecstasy, which knows such spasms of delirium, he recoiled from her. 
It was what she used to call her 'satisfaction.' She had loved Joachim for this, that again, and again, and again he 
could give her this orgiastic 'satisfaction,' in spasms that made her cry aloud. 
 
 "But Cipriano would not. By a dark and powerful instinct  he drew away from her as soon as this desire rose 
again in her, for the white ecstasy of frictional satisfacti on, the throes of Aphrodite of the foam. She could see that, 
to him, it was repulsive. He just removed himself, dark and unchangeable, away from her. 
 "And she, as she lay, would realize the worthlessness of  this foam-effervescence, its strange externality to 
her. It seemed to come from without , not from within. And succeeding the first moment of disappointment, when 
this sort of 'satisfaction' was denied her, came the knowle dge that she did not really want it, that it was really 
nauseous to her. 
 "And he in his dark, hot silence would bring her back to the new, soft, heavy, hot flow, when she was like a 
fountain gushing noiseless and w ith urgent softness from the deeps. Ther e she was open to him soft and hot, yet 
gushing with a noiseless soft power. And there was no such  thing as conscious 'satis faction.' What happened was 
dark and untellable. So different from the beak-like frictio n of Aphrodite of the foam, the friction which flares out 
in circles of phosphorescent ecsta sy, to the last wild spas m which utters the involunta ry cry, like a death-cry, the 
final love-cry." 
 Male Continence is not merely a device for domes ticating sexuality and hei ghtening its psychological 
significance; it is also, as the histor y of the Oneida Community abundantly proves, a remarkably effective method 
of birth control. Indeed, under the name of coitus reservatus, it is one of the two methods of birth control approved 
by the authorities of th e Roman Church -- the other and more widely publicized me thod being the restriction of 
intercourse to the so-called safe periods. Unfortunately la rge-scale field experiments in  India have shown that, in 
the kind of society which has the most urgent need of birt h control, the safe period me thod is almost useless. And 
whereas Noyes, the practical Yankee, devoted much time a nd thought to the problem of training his followers in 
Male Continence, the Roma n Church has done little or nothing to instruct its yout h in the art of coitus reservatus. 
(How odd it is that while primitive peopl es, like the Trobrianders, are careful to  teach their childre n the best ways 
of domesticating sex, we, the Civilized, stupidly leave ours at the mercy of their wild and dangerous passions!) 
 Meanwhile, over most of the earth, population is risi ng faster than available resources. There are more 
people with less to eat. But when th e standard of living goes down, social unrest goes up, and the revolutionary 
agitator, who has no scruples about making promises which he knows very well he cannot keep, finds golden 
opportunities. Confronted by th e appalling dangers inherent in populat ion increase at present rates, most 
governments have permitted and one or two have actually encouraged their subjects to make use of contraceptives. 
But they have done so in the teeth of protests fr om the Roman Church. By outlawing contraceptives and by 
advocating instead two methods of birth control, one of which doesn't work, while the other, effective method is 
never systematically taught, the prelates of that Church seem to be doing th eir best to ensure, first, a massive 
increase in the sum of human misery and, second, the triumph, within a generation or two, of World Communism. 
(From Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

51
SECTION II 
 
 
 
LITERATURE 
 
 
 
Subject-Matter of Poetry 
 
 It should theoretically be possible to make poetry out of anything whatsoever of which the spirit of man can 
take cognizance. We find, however, as a matter of historical fact , that most of the worl d's best poetry has been 
content with a curiously narrow range  of subject-matter. The poets have claimed as their domain only a small 
province of our universe. One of them now and then, more daring or better eq uipped than the rest, sets out to 
extend the boundaries of the ki ngdom. But for the most pa rt the poets do not concer n themselves with fresh 
conquests; they prefer to consolidate their power at hom e, enjoying quietly their here ditary possessions. All the 
world is potentially theirs, but  they do not take it. What is the reason fo r this, and why is it that poetical practice 
does not conform to critical theory? The problem has a peculiar relevance and importance in these days, when 
young poetry claims absolute liberty to speak how it likes of whatsoever it pleases. 
 Wordsworth, whose literary criticism, dry and forbi dding though its aspects may be, is always illumined by 
a penetrating intelligence, Wordsworth touched upon this problem in his preface to Lyrical Ballads -- touched on it 
and, as usual, had something of value to say about it. He is speaking here of the most  important and the most 
interesting of the subjects which may, theoretically, be made into poetry, but which have, as a matter of fact, rarely 
or never undergone the transmutation:  he is speaking of the relations be tween poetry and that vast world of 
abstractions and ideas -- science and philosophy -- into which so  few poets have ever pe netrated. "The remotest 
discoveries of the chemist, the botanist, or mineralogist, will be as proper objects of the poet's art as any upon 
which he is now employed, if the time should ever come when these things shall be familiar to us, and the relations 
under which they are contemplated shall be manifestly and palpably material to us as enjoying and suffering 
beings." It is a formidable sentence; but read it well, read th e rest of the passage from  which it is taken, and you 
will find it to be full of critical truth. 
 The gist of Wordsworth's argument is this. All subjects -- "the remotest discoveries of the chemist" are but 
one example of an unlikely poetic theme -- can serve the poet  with material for his art,  on one condition: that he, 
and to a lesser degree his audience, shall be able to a pprehend the subject with a certain emotion. The subject must 
somehow be involved in the poet's intimate being before he  can turn it into poetry. It is not enough, for example, 
that he should apprehend it merely through his senses. (The poetry of pure sensation, of sounds and bright colors, is 
common enough nowadays; but amusing as we may find it for the moment, it cannot hold th e interest for long.) It 
is not enough, at the other end of the scale, if he apprehe nds his subject in a purely intellectual manner. An abstract 
idea must be felt with a kind of passion, it must mean some thing emotionally significant, it must be as immediate 
and important to the poet as  a personal relationship before  he can make poetry of it. Poetry, in a word, must be 
written by "enjoying and suffering beings,"  not by beings exclusively dowered w ith sensations or, as exclusively, 
with intellect. 
 Wordsworth's criticism helps us to understand why so few subjects have ever been made into poetry when 
everything under the sun, and beyond it, is theoretically suitab le for transmutation into a work of art. Death, love, 
religion, nature; the primary emotions and the ultimate pers onal mysteries -- these form the subject-matter of most 
of the greatest poetry. And for obvious reasons. These thi ngs are "manifestly and palpably material to us as 
enjoying and suffering beings." But to most men, including the generality of poets, abstractions and ideas are not 
immediately and passionately moving. They are not enjoying or suffering when they apprehend these things -- only 
thinking. 
 The men who do feel passionately a bout abstractions, the men to whom ideas are as persons -- moving and 
disquietingly alive -- are very seldom poets. They ar e men of science and philosophers, preoccupied with the 
search for truth and not, like the poet, wi th the expression and creation of beaut y. It is very rarely that we find a

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

52
poet who combines the power and the desire  to express himself with that passionate apprehension of ideas and that 
passionate curiosity about strange remote facts which char acterize the man of science and the philosopher. If he 
possessed the requisite sense of language and the impelling de sire to express himself in terms of beauty, Einstein 
could write the most intoxicating lyrics about relativity  and the pleasures of pure mathematics. And if, say, Mr. 
Yeats understood the Einstein theory -- which, in company with most other living poet s, he presumably does not, 
any more than the rest of us -- if  he apprehended it exultingly as some thing bold and profound, something vitally 
important and marvelously true, he too could give us, out of  the Celtic twilight, his lyrics of relativity. It is those 
distressing little "ifs" that stand in the way of this happy consummation. The conditions upon which any but the 
most immediately and obviously moving su bjects can be made into poetry are so rarely fulfilled, the combination 
of poet and man of science, poet and ph ilosopher, is so uncommon, that the theoretical univ ersality of the art has 
only very occasionally been realized in practice. 
 Contemporary poetry in the whole of the western wo rld is insisting, loudly a nd emphatically through the 
mouths of its propagandists, on an absolu te liberty to speak of what it likes how it likes. Nothing could be better; 
all that we can now ask is that the po ets should put the theory into practice, and that th ey should make use of the 
liberty which they claim by enlarging the bounds of poetry. 
 The propagandists would have us believe that the subject-matter of  contemporary poetry is new and 
startling, that modern poets are doing something which has not been done before. "Most of the poets represented in 
these pages," writes Mr. Louis Untermeyer in his Anthology of Modern American Poetry, "have found a fresh and 
vigorous material in a world of honest and often harsh reality. They respond to  the spirit of their times; not only 
have their views changed, their vision has been widened to  include things unknown to the poets of yesterday. They 
have learned to distinguish real beauty from mere prettines s, to wring loveliness out of squalor, to find wonder in 
neglected places, to search for hidden truths even in the dark caves of the unconscious." Translated into practice 
this means that contemporary poets can now write, in the words of Mr. Sandburg, of the "harr and boom of the 
blast fires," of "wops and bohunks." It means, in fact, that they are at liberty to do what Homer did -- to write freely 
about the immediately moving facts of everyday life. Where Homer wrote of horses and the tamers of horses, our 
contemporaries write of trains, automobiles, and th e various species of wops and bohunks who control the 
horsepower. That is all. Much too much stress has been laid on the newness of the new poetry; its newness is 
simply a return from the jeweled exquisiteness of the eight een-nineties to the facts and feelings of ordinary life. 
There is nothing intrinsically novel or su rprising in the introduction into poetr y of machinery and industrialism, of 
labor unrest and modern psychology: th ese things belong to us, they affect  us daily as enjoying and suffering 
beings; they are a part of our lives , just as the kings, the warriors, th e horses and chariots, the picturesque 
mythology were part of Homer's life. The subject-matter of the new poetry remains the same as that of the old. The 
old boundaries have not been extended. There would be real novelty in the new poetry if it had, for example, taken 
to itself any of the new ideas and as tonishing facts with which the new sc ience has endowed th e modern world. 
There would be real novelty in it if it had worked out a satisfactory artistic method for dealing with abstractions. It 
has not. Which simply means that that rare phenomenon, the poet in whose mind ideas are a passion and a personal 
moving force, does not happen to have appeared. 
 And how rarely in all the long past he has appeared! There was Lucretius, the greatest of all the philosophic 
and scientific poets. In him the passi onate apprehension of id eas, and the desire and ability to give them 
expression, combined to produce that stra nge and beautiful epic of thought wh ich is without para llel in the whole 
history of literature. There was Dante, in whose soul the medieval Christian philosophy was a force that shaped and 
directed every feeling, thought and ac tion. There was Goethe, who focused in to beautiful expression an enormous 
diffusion of knowledge and ideas. And there the list of the great poets  of thought comes to an end. In their task of 
extending the boundaries of poetry into the remote and ab stract world of ideas, they have had a few lesser 
assistants -- Donne, for example, a poe t only just less than the gr eatest; Fulke Greville, th at strange, dark-spirited 
Elizabethan; John Davidson, who made a kind of poetry out of Darwinism; and, mo st interesting poetical 
interpreter of nineteenth-century science, Jules Laforgue. 
 Which of our contemporaries can claim to have extende d the bounds of poetry to any material extent? It is 
not enough to have written about locomotives and telephones , "wops and bohunks," and all the rest of it. That is 
not extending the range of poetr y; it is merely asserting its right to deal  with the immediate facts of contemporary 
life, as Homer and as Chaucer did. The critics who would have us believe that there is something essentially

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

53
unpoetical about a bohunk (whatever a bohunk may be), and something essentiall y poetical about Sir Lancelot of 
the Lake, are, of course, simply neg ligible; they may be dismissed as cont emptuously as we have dismissed the 
pseudo-classical critics who opposed the fr eedoms of the Romantic Revival. A nd the critics who th ink it very new 
and splendid to bring bohunks into poetry are equally old-fashioned in their ideas. 
 It will not be unprofitable to compare the literary situation in this earl y twentieth century of ours with the 
literary situation of the early seventee nth century. In both epochs we see a reaction against a rich and somewhat 
formalized poetical tradition expressing itself in a determina tion to extend the range of subject-matter, to get back 
to real life, and to use more natural forms of expression. The difference between the two epochs lies in the fact that 
the twentieth-century revolution has b een the product of a number of minor  poets, none of them quite powerful 
enough to achieve what he theoretically meant to do, while  the seventeenth-century re volution was the work of a 
single poet of genius, John Donne. Donne substituted for the rich formalism of non-dramatic Elizabethan poetry a 
completely realized new style, the st yle of the so-called metaphysical poetry of the seventeenth century. He was a 
poet-philosopher-man-of-action whose passionate curiosity about facts enabled him to make poetry out of the most 
unlikely aspects of material life, and whose passionate apprehension of ideas  enabled him to extend the bounds of 
poetry beyond the frontiers of common life and its emotions  into the void of intellectual abstraction. He put the 
whole life and the whole mind of his age into poetry. 
 We today are metaphysicals without our Donne. Theoreti cally we are free to make poetry of everything in 
the universe; in practice we are kept w ithin the old limits, for the simple reason that no great man has appeared to 
show us how we can use our freedom. A certain amount of the life of the twentieth centu ry is to be found in our 
poetry, but precious little of its mind. We have no poet today like that stra nge old Dean of St. Paul's three hundred 
years ago -- no poet who can skip from the heights of sc holastic philosophy to the heights of carnal passion, from 
the contemplation of divinity to the contemplation of a flea, from the rapt exam ination of self to an enumeration of 
the most remote external facts of science, and make all, by his strangely passionate apprehension, into an intensely 
lyrical poetry. 
 The few poets who do try to make of contemporary ideas the substanc e of their poetry, do it in a manner 
which brings little conviction or satisfaction to the read er. There is Mr. Noyes, who is writing four volumes of 
verse about the human side of science -- in his case, al as, all too human. Then there is Mr. Conrad Aiken. He 
perhaps is the most successful exponent  in poetry of contemporary ideas. In his case, it is  clear, "the remotest 
discoveries of the chemist" are apprehended with a certa in passion; all his emotions are tinged by his ideas. The 
trouble with Mr. Aiken is that his emotions are apt to de generate into a kind of intellectual sentimentality, which 
expresses itself only too easily in his prodigiously fluent, highly colored verse. 
 One could lengthen the list of more or less interesting poets who have tried in recent times to extend the 
boundaries of their art. But one would not find among them  a single poet of real importance, not one great or 
outstanding personality. The twentieth century still awaits its Lucretius, awaits its own philosophical Dante, its new 
Goethe, its Donne, even its up-to-date Laforgue. Will they  appear? Or are we to go on producing a poetry in which 
there is no more than the dimmest reflection of that busy and incessant intellectual life which is the characteristic 
and distinguishing mark of this age? 
(From On the Margin) 
 
 
 
Tragedy and the Whole Truth 
 
 There were six of them, the best and bravest of the hero's companions. Turning back from his post in the 
bows, Odysseus was in time to see th em lifted, struggling, into the air, to hear their screams, the desperate 
repetition of his own name. The survi vors could only look on, helplessly, while  Scylla "at the mouth of her cave 
devoured them, still screaming, still stretching out their hand s to me in the frightful struggle." And Odysseus adds 
that it was the most dreadful and lamentable sight he ever saw in all his "explorings of the passes of the sea." We 
can believe it; Homer's brief description (the too poetical simile is a later interpolation) convinces us. 
 Later, the danger passed, Odysseus and his men we nt ashore for the night, and, on the Sicilian beach, 
prepared their supper -- prepar ed it, says Homer, "expertly." The Twelfth Book of the Odyssey concludes with

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

54
these words: "When they had satisfied their thirst and hunge r, they thought of their dear companions and wept, and 
in the midst of their tears sleep came gently upon them." 
 The truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth -- how rarely the older literatures ever told it! Bits of the 
truth, yes; every good book gives us b its of the truth, would not  be a good book if it did not. But the whole truth, 
no. Of the great writers of the past incredibly fe w have given us that. Homer -- the Homer of the Odyssey -- is one 
of those few. 
 "Truth?" you question. "For example, 2+2=4? Or Queen  Victoria came to the throne in 1837? Or light 
travels at the rate of 187,000 miles a second?" No, obviously, you won't find much of that sort of thing in literature. 
The "truth" of which I was speaking just now is in f act no more than an acceptable verisimilitude. When the 
experiences recorded in  a piece of litera ture correspond fairly closely with our own actual experiences, or with 
what I may call our potential experiences -- experiences, that  is to say, which we feel (as the result of a more or 
less explicit process of inference from known facts) that we might have had -- we say, inaccurately no doubt: "This 
piece of writing is true." But this, of  course, is not the whole story. Th e record of a case in a text-book of 
psychology is scientifically true , in so far as it is an accura te account of particular even ts. But it might also strike 
the reader as being "true" with regard to himself -- th at is to say, acceptable, proba ble, having a correspondence 
with his own actual or potential ex periences. But a text-book of psychology is not a work of art -- or only 
secondarily and incidentally a work of art. Mere verisimilitude, mere correspondence of experience recorded by the 
writer with experience remembered or imaginable by the re ader, is not enough to make a work of art seem "true." 
Good art possesses a kind of super-truth --  is more probable, more acceptable,  more convincing than fact itself. 
Naturally; for the artist is endowed with a sensibility and a power of co mmunication, a capacity to "put things 
across," which events and the majority of people to wh om events happen, do not possess. Experience teaches only 
the teachable, who are by no means as numerous as Mrs. Micawber's papa's favorite proverb would lead us to 
suppose. Artists are eminently teachable and also eminently  teachers. They receive from events much more than 
most men receive and they can transmit what they have re ceived with a peculiar penetr ative force, which drives 
their communication deep into the reader 's mind. One of our most ordinary r eactions to a good piece of literary art 
is expressed in the formula: "This is what I have always  felt and thought, but have neve r been able to put clearly 
into words, even for myself." 
 We are now in a position to explain what we mean, when  we say that Homer is a writer who tells the Whole 
Truth. We mean that the experiences  he records correspond fairly clos ely with our own actual or potential 
experiences -- and correspond with our e xperiences not on a single limited sect or, but all along the line of our 
physical and spiritual being. And we also mean that Home r records these experiences w ith a penetra tive artistic 
force that makes them seem peculiarly acceptable and convincing. 
 So much, then, for truth in literature. Homer's, I re peat, is the Whole Truth. Consider how almost any other 
of the great poets would have conclude d the story of Scylla's attack on the passing ship. Six men, remember, have 
been taken and devoured before the eyes of  their friends. In any other poem but the Odyssey, what would the 
survivors have done? They would, of course, have wept , even as Homer made them weep. But would they 
previously have cooked their supper, and cooked it, what's  more, in a masterly fashion? Would they previously 
have drunken and eaten to satiety? And after weeping, or actually while weeping, would they have dropped quietly 
off to sleep? No, they most certainly  would not have done any of these th ings. They would simply have wept, 
lamenting their own misfortune and the horrible fate of their compani ons, and the Canto would have ended 
tragically on their tears. 
 Homer, however, preferred to tell the Whole Truth. He knew that even th e most cruelly bereaved must eat; 
that hunger is stronger than sorrow and th at its satisfaction takes precedence even of tears. He knew that experts 
continue to act expertly and to find satisfaction in their accomplishment, even when friends have just been eaten, 
even when the accomplishment is only cooking the supper. He knew that, when the belly is full (and only when the 
belly is full), men can afford to grieve, and that sorrow after supper is almost a luxu ry. And finally he knew that, 
even as hunger takes precedence of grief, so fatigue, superv ening, cuts short its career and drowns it in a sleep all 
the sweeter for bringing forgetfulness of bereavement. In a word, Homer refu sed to treat the theme tragically. He 
preferred to tell the Whole Truth. 
 Another author who preferred to tell the Whole Truth was Fielding. Tom Jones is one of the very Odyssean 
books written in Europe between the tim e of Aeschylus and the present age; Odyssean, because never tragical;

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

55
never -- even when painful and disastrous, even when pathetic and beautiful thin gs are happening. For they do 
happen; Fielding, like Homer, admits all the facts, shirks nothing. Indeed, it is precisely because these authors shirk 
nothing that their books are not tragical. For among the things they don't shirk are the irrelevancies which, in actual 
life, always temper the situations and characters that writers of tragedy insist on  keeping chemically pure. 
Consider, for example, the case of Sophy Western, that  most charming, most nearly perfect of young women. 
Fielding, it is obvious, adored her (she is said to have been created in the imag e of his first, much-loved wife). But 
in spite of his adoration, he refused to turn her into one  of those chemically pure an d, as it were, focused beings 
who do not suffer in the world of tragedy. That innkeeper who lifted the weary Sophia from her horse -- what need 
had he to fall? In no tragedy would he (nay, could he) have collapsed beneath her weight. For, to begin with, in the 
tragical context weight is an irrelevance; heroines should be above the law of  gravitation. But that is not all; let the 
reader now remember what were the results of his fall.  Tumbling flat on his back, he pulled Sophia down on top of 
him -- his belly was a cushion, so that happily she came to  no bodily harm -- pulled her down head first. But head 
first is necessarily legs last; there wa s a momentary display of the most ravishing charms; the bumpkins at the inn 
door grinned and guffawed; poor Sophia, when they pi cked her up, was blushing in an agony of embarrassment 
and wounded modesty. There is nothing intrinsically impr obable about this incident, which is stamped, indeed, 
with all the marks of literary truth. But however true, it is an incident which could never, never have happened to a 
heroine of tragedy. It would never have been allowed to  happen. But Fielding refused to impose the tragedian's 
veto; he shirked nothing -- neither the intrusion of irrelevant absurditie s into the midst of romance or disaster, nor 
any of life's no less irrelevan tly painful interruptions of the course of happiness. He di d not want to be a tragedian. 
And, sure enough, that brief and pearly gleam of Sophia's charming posterior wa s sufficient to scare the Muse of 
Tragedy out of Tom Jones just as, more than five and twenty centuries before, the sight of stricken men first eating, 
then remembering to weep, then forgetting their tears in slumber had scared her out of the Odyssey. 
 In his Principles of Literary Criticism Mr. I. A. Richards affirms that  good tragedy is proof against irony 
and irrelevance -- that it can absorb anyt hing into itself and still remain tragedy. Indeed, he seems to make of this 
capacity to absorb the untragical and the anti-tragical a touchstone of tragic merit. Thus tried, practically all Greek, 
all French and most Elizabethan traged ies are found wanting. Only the best of Shakespeare can stand the test. So, 
at least, says Mr. Richards. Is he right? I have often had my doubts. The tragedies of Shakespeare are veined, it is 
true, with irony and an often terrifying cynicism; but the cynicism is alwa ys heroic idealism turned neatly inside 
out, the irony is a kind of photographic negative of heroic  romance. Turn Troilus's white into black and all his 
blacks into white and you have Thersites. Reversed, Othello and Desdemona become Iago. White Ophelia's 
negative is the irony of Hamlet, is the ingenuous bawdry of her own mad songs; just as the cynicism of mad King 
Lear is the black shadow-replica of Cordelia. Now, the shadow, the photographic negative of a thing is in no sense 
irrelevant to it. Shakespeare's ironies and cynicisms serve to deepen his tragic world, but not to widen it. If they 
had widened it, as the Homeric irreleva ncies widened out the universe of the Odyssey -- why, then, the world of 
Shakespearean tragedy would automatically have ceased to  exist. For example, a scene showing the bereaved 
Macduff eating his supper, growing melancholy, over the whisky, with thoughts of his murdered wife and children, 
and then, with lashes still wet, dropping off to sleep, would be true enough to life; but it would not be true to tragic 
art. The introduction of such a scene would change the whol e quality of the play; treated  in this Odyssean style, 
Macbeth would cease to be a tragedy. Or take the case of Desdemona. Iago's bestially cynical remarks about her 
character are in no sense, as we have seen, irrelevant to the tragedy. They present us with negative images of her 
real nature and of the feelings she has fo r Othello. These negative images are always hers, are always recognizably 
the property of the heroine-victim of a tragedy. Whereas, if, springing ashore at Cyprus, she had tumbled, as the no 
less exquisite Sophia was to tumble, a nd revealed the inadequacies of sixt eenth-century underclothing, the play 
would no longer be the Othello we know. Iago might breed a family of little cynics and the existing dose of 
bitterness and savage nega tion be doubled and trebled; Othello would still remain fundamentally Othello. But a 
few Fieldingesque irrelevancies would de stroy it -- destroy it, that is to sa y, as a tragedy; for there would be 
nothing to prevent it from becoming a magnificent drama of some other kind. For the fact is that tragedy and what I 
have called the Whole Truth are not compatible; where one is , the other is not. There are certain things which even 
the best, even Shakespearean tragedy, cannot absorb into itself. 
 To make a tragedy the artist must isolate a single elem ent out of the totality of  human experience and use 
that exclusively as his material. Tragedy is something that  is separated from the Whole Truth, distilled from it, so

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

56
to speak, as an essence is distilled from the living flow er. Tragedy is chemically pure. Hence its power to act 
quickly and intensely on our feelings. All chemically pure art has this power to act upon us quic kly and intensely. 
Thus, chemically pure pornography (on the rare occasions when it happens to be written convincingly, by some 
one who has the gift of "putting things across") is a qui ck-acting emotional drug of incomparably greater power 
than the Whole Truth about sensuality, or even (for many people) than the tangible and carnal reality itself. It is 
because of its chemical purity that trag edy so effectively performs its function of  catharsis. It refines and corrects 
and gives a style to our emotional li fe, and does so swiftly, with power. Br ought into contact w ith tragedy, the 
elements of our being fall, for the mome nt at any rate, into an ordered and b eautiful pattern, as  the iron filings 
arrange themselves under the influence of the magnet. Thr ough all its individual variati ons, this pattern is always 
fundamentally of the same kind. From the reading or the hearing of a tragedy we rise with the feeling that 
 
 Our friends are exultations, agonies, 
 And love, and man's unconquerable mind; 
 
with the heroic conviction that we too would be unconquerabl e if subjected to the agonies , that in the midst of the 
agonies we too should continue to love, might even learn to exult. It is becau se it does these th ings to us that 
tragedy is felt to be so valuable. What are the values of  Wholly-Truthful art? What does it do to us that seems 
worth doing? Let us try to discover. 
 Wholly-Truthful art overflows the limits of tragedy a nd shows us, if only by hints and implications, what 
happened before the tragic story began, what will happen after it is over, what is happening simultaneously 
elsewhere (and "elsewhere" includes a ll those parts of the minds and bodies  of the protagonists not immediately 
engaged in the tragic struggle) . Tragedy is an arbitrarily is olated eddy on the surface of a vast river th at flows on 
majestically, irresistibly, around, beneat h, and to either side of it. Wholly -Truthful art contrives to imply the 
existence of the entire river as well as  of the eddy. It is quite different from tragedy, even though it may contain, 
among other constituents, all the elements from which tr agedy is made. (The "same thing" placed in different 
contexts, loses its identity and becomes, for the percei ving mind, a succession of different things.) In Wholly-
Truthful art the agonies may be just as real, love and th e unconquerable mind just as admi rable, just as important, 
as in tragedy. Thus, Scylla's vi ctims suffer as painfully as the monster-devoured Hippolytus in Phèdre; the mental 
anguish of Tom Jones when he thinks he has lost his Sophia , and lost her by his own fault,  is hardly less than that 
of Othello after Desdemona's murder. (T he fact that Fielding's power of "putting things across" is by no means 
equal to Shakespeare's, is, of course, merely an accident .) But the agonies and indomitabilities are placed by the 
Wholly-Truthful writer in another, wider context, with the result that they cease to be the same as the intrinsically 
identical agonies and indomitabilities of tragedy. Consequently, Wholly-Truthful art produces in us an effect quite 
different from that produced by tragedy. Our mood, when we have read a Wholly-Truthful book, is never one of 
heroic exultation; it is one of re signation, of acceptance. (Acceptance can al so be heroic.) Being chemically 
impure, Wholly-Truthful lite rature cannot move us as quickly and in tensely as tragedy or any other kind of 
chemically pure art. But I believe that  its effects are more lasting. The exul tations that follow the reading or 
hearing of a tragedy are in the nature of temporary inebriations. Our being cannot long hold the pattern imposed by 
tragedy. Remove the magnet and the fili ngs tend to fall back into confusi on. But the pattern of acceptance and 
resignation imposed upon us by Wholly-Truthful literature,  though perhaps less unexpectedly beautiful in design, 
is (for that very reason perhaps) more  stable. The catharsis of tragedy is vi olent and apocalyptic; but the milder 
catharsis of Wholly-Truthful literature is lasting. 
 In recent times literature has become more and more acutely conscious of the W hole Truth -- of the great 
oceans of irrelevant things, events and thoughts stretching endlessly away in every dire ction from whatever island 
point (a character, a story) the auth or may choose to contemplate. To im pose the kind of arbitrary limitations, 
which must be imposed by any one who wants to write a tragedy, has become more a nd more difficult -- is now 
indeed, for those who are at all sens itive to contemporaneity, almost impossible. This does not mean, of course, 
that the modern writer must confine himself to a merely  naturalistic manner. One can imply the existence of the 
Whole Truth without laborious ly cataloguing ever y object within sight. A book can be written in terms of pure 
phantasy and yet, by implication, tell the Whole Truth. Of  all the important works of contemporary literature not 
one is a pure tragedy. There is no contemporary writer of significance who does not prefer  to state or imply the 
Whole Truth. However different one from another in style, in ethical, philos ophical and artistic intention, in the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

57
scales of values accepted, contemporary writers have this in common, that they  are interested in the Whole Truth. 
Proust, D. H. Lawrence, André Gide, Kafka, Hemingway  -- here are five obviously significant and important 
contemporary writers. Five authors as remarkably unlike one another as they could well be. They are at one only in 
this: that none of them has written a pure tragedy, that all are concerned with the W hole Truth. I have sometimes 
wondered whether tragedy, as a form of art, may not be doomed. But the fact that we are still profoundly moved by 
the tragic masterpieces of the past --  that we can be moved, against our be tter judgment, even by the bad tragedies 
of the contemporary stage and film -- makes me think that  the day of chemically pur e art is not over. Tragedy 
happens to be passing through a period of eclipse, because all the signifi cant writers of our age are too busy 
exploring the newly discovered, or re-discovered, world of the Whole Truth to be able to pay any attention to it. 
But there is no good reason to believe that this state of th ings will last for ever. Tragedy is too valuable to be 
allowed to die. There is no reason, after all, why the two kinds of literature -- the Chemically Impure and the 
Chemically Pure, the literature of the Whole Truth a nd the literature of Partial Truth -- should not exist 
simultaneously, each in its separate sphere. The human spirit has need of both. 
(From Music at Night) 
 
 
 
Vulgarity in Literature 
 
I 
 Vulgarity in literature must be distinguished from th e vulgarity inherent in the profession of letters. Every 
man is born with his share of Original  Sin, to which every writer adds a pinc h of Original Vulgarity. Necessarily 
and quite inevitably. For exhibitionism is always vulgar, even if what you exhibit is the most exquisitely refined of 
souls. 
 Some writers are more squeamishly conscious than others  of the essential vulgarity of their trade -- so much 
so, that, like Flaubert, they have fou nd it hard to commit that initial offe nse against good breeding: the putting of 
pen to paper. 
 It is just possible, of course, that  the greatest writers have never written;  that the world is full of Monsieur 
Testes and mute inglorious Miltons, t oo delicate to come before the public. I should like to believe it; but I find it 
hard. Your great writer is possessed by a devil, over which he  has very little control. If the devil wants to come out 
(and, in practice, devils always do want to come out), it will do so, however loud the protests of the aristocratic 
consciousness, with which it uneasily cohabits. The profe ssion of literature may be "fatally marred by a secret 
absurdity"; the devil simply doesn't care. Scribo quia absurdum. 
 
II 
 To be pale, to have no appetite, to swoon at the slightest provocation --  these, not so long ago, were the 
signs of maidenly good breeding. In other words, when a girl was marked with the stigmata of anemia and chronic 
constipation, you knew she was a lady. Virtues are generall y fashioned (more or less elegantly, according to the 
skill of the moral couturier) out of necessities. Rich girls had no need to work; the aristocratic tradition 
discouraged them from voluntarily working; and the Christian tradition discouraged them from compromising their 
maiden modesty by taking anything like violent exercise. Good carriage-roads and, finally, railways spared them 
the healthy fatigues of riding. The virt ues of Fresh Air had not yet been discovered and the Draft was still the 
commonest, as it was almost the most dangerous, manifestation of the Diabol ic Principle. More perverse than 
Chinese foot-squeezers, the topiarists of European fashi on had decreed that the elegant should have all her viscera 
constricted and displaced by tight  lacing. In a word, the rich girl lived a lif e scientifically calculated to make her 
unhealthy. A virtue was made of humiliating necessity, a nd the pale ethereal swooner of romantic literature 
remained for years the type and mirror of refined young womanhood. 
 Something of the same kind happens from time to tim e in the realm of literature. Moments come when too 
conspicuous a show of vigor, too frank an interest in co mmon things are signs of literary vulgarity. To be really 
lady-like, the Muses, like their mortal sisters, must be anemic and constipated. On the more sensitive writers of 
certain epochs circumstances impose an artistic wasting aw ay, a literary consumption. This distressing fatality is at

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

58
once transformed into a virtue, which it becomes a duty for all to cultivate. 
 "Vivre? Nos valets le  feront pour nous." For, oh, the vulgarity of it! The vulgarity of this  having to walk 
and talk; to open and close the eyes; to  think and drink and every day, yes, ev ery day, to eat, eat and excrete. And 
then this having to pursue the female  of one's species, or the male, whiche ver the case may be; this having to 
cerebrate, to calculate, to copulate, to propagate. . . No, no -- too gross, too stupidly low. Such things, as Villiers de 
l'Isle-Adam says, are all very well for footmen. But for a descendant of how many ge nerations of Templars, of 
Knights of Rhodes and of Malta , Knights of the Garter and the Holy Ghost and all the va riously colored Eagles -- 
obviously, it was out of the quest ion; it simply wasn't done. Vivre? Nos valets le feront pour nous. At the same 
point, but on another plane, of the great spiral of history, Prince Gotama, more than two thousand years before, had 
also discovered the vulgarity of living. The sight of a corpse rotting by the roadside had set him thinking. It was his 
first introduction to death. Now, a corpse, poor thing, is an untouchable and the process of decay is, of all pieces of 
bad manners, the vulgarest imaginable. For a corpse is, by definition, a person absolutely devoid of savoir vivre. 
Even your sweeper knows better. But in every greatest king, in every loveliest flowery princess, in every poet most 
refined, every best dressed dandy, every holiest and most spiritual teacher, there lurks, waiting, waiting for the 
moment to emerge, an outcaste of the outcastes, a dung carrier, a dog, lower than the lowest, bottomlessly vulgar. 
 What with making their way and enj oying what they have won, heroes have  no time to thi nk. But the sons 
of heroes -- ah, they have all the necessary leisure. The future Buddha be longed to the generation which has time. 
He saw the corpse, he smelt it vulgarly stinking, he thought. The echoes of his meditations still reverberate, rich 
with an accumulated wealth of harmoni cs, like the memory of the organ's fi nal chord pulsing back and forth under 
the vaulting of a cathedral. 
 No less than that of war or statecraft, the histor y of economics has its heroic ages. Economically, the 
nineteenth century was the equivalent of those brave tim es about which we read in Beowulf and the Iliad. Its 
heroes struggled, conquered or were conquered, and ha d no time to think. Its bards, the Romantics, sang 
rapturously, not of the heroes, but of higher things (for they were Homers who detested Achilles), sang with all the 
vehemence which one of the contemporary heroes would ha ve put into grinding the f aces of the poor. It was only 
in the second and third generation that men began to have  leisure and the necessary detachment to find the whole 
business -- economic heroism and romantic bardism -- rath er vulgar. Villiers, like Gotama, was one who had time. 
That he was the descendant of all those Templars and Knights of this and that was, to a great extent, irrelevant. The 
significant fact was this: he was, or at any rate chronologically might have been, the son and grandson of economic 
heroes and romantic bards -- a man of the decadence. Sons have always a rebellious wish to be disillusioned by 
that which charmed their fathers; and, wish or no wish, it was difficult for a sensitive man to see and smell the 
already putrefying corpse of industrial civilization and not be shocked by it in to distressful thought. Villiers was 
duly shocked; and he expressed his shockedness in terms of an aristocratic disdain that was almost Brahminical in 
its intensity. But his feudal terminology was hardly more th an an accident. Born without any of Villiers' perhaps 
legendary advantages of breeding, othe r sensitives of the same post-heroic  generation were just as profoundly 
shocked. The scion of Templars had a more striking vocabular y than the others -- that was all. For the most self-
conscious and intelligent artists of the last decades of  the nineteenth century, too frank an acceptance of the 
obvious actualities of life, too hearty a manner and (to put it grossly) too many " guts" were rather vulgar. Vivre? 
Nos valets le feront pour nous. (Incidentally, the suicide rate took a sharp upward turn during the 'sixties. In some 
countries it is nearly five times what  it was seventy years ago.) Zola was the master footman of the age. That 
vulgar interest in actual life! And all those guts of his -- was the man preparing to set up as a tripe-dresser? 
 A few aging ninetyites survive; a few young neo-ninety ites, who judge of art and all other human activities 
in terms of the Amusing and the Tiresome, play kitteni shly around with their wax flowers and stuffed owls and 
Early Victorian bead-work. But, old a nd young, they are insignificant. Guts and an acceptance of the actual are no 
longer vulgar. Why not? What has happene d? Three things: the usual reaction of sons against fathers, another 
industrial revolution an d a rediscovery of mystery. We have entere d (indeed, we have perhaps already passed 
through) a second heroic age of economi cs. Its Homers, it is true, are almost  without exception skeptical, ironic, 
denunciatory. But this skepticism, this irony, this denunciation are as lively and vehement as that which is doubted 
and denounced. Babbitt infects even his detractors with some of his bouncing vitality. The Romantics, in the same 
way, possessed an energy proportionate to that of their en emies, the economic heroes who were creating modern 
industrialism. Life begets life, even in opposition to itself.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

59
 Vivre? Nos valets le feront pour nous. But the physicists and psychologists have revealed the universe as a 
place, in spite of everything, so fantastically queer, that  to hand it over to be enjoye d by footmen would be a piece 
of gratuitous humanitarianism. Servants must not be s poiled. The most refined spirits need not be ashamed in 
taking a hearty interest in the rediscovered mystery of the actual world. True, it is a sinister as well as a fascinating 
and mysterious world. And what a mess, with all our good intentions, we have made and are busily making of our 
particular corner of it! The same old industrial corpse -- to some extent disi nfected and galvanically stimulated at 
the moment into a twitching semblance of healthy life -- still rots by the wayside, as it rotted in Villiers' time. And 
as for Gotama's carrion -- that of c ourse is always with us. There are, as ever, excellent reasons for personal 
despair; while the reasons for despairing about society are actually a good deal more cogent than at most times. A 
Mallarméan shrinking away into pure poetry, a delicate Henry-Ja mesian avoidance of all the painful issues would 
seem to be justified. But the spirit of the time -- the i ndustrially heroic time in which we live -- is opposed to these 
retirements, these handings over of life to footmen. It demands that we should "press with strenuous tongue against 
our palate" not only joy's grape, but ev ery Dead Sea fruit. Even dust and ashe s must be relished with gusto. Thus, 
modern American fiction, like the mode rn American fact which it so accurat ely renders, is ample and lively. And 
yet, "Dust and ashes, dust and ashes"  is the fundamental theme and final moral of practically every modern 
American novel of any distin ction. High spirits and a heroic  vitality are put into the expression of despair. The 
hopelessness is almost Rabelaisian. 
 
III 
 It was vulgar at the beginning of th e nineteenth century to mention th e word "handkerchief" on the French 
tragic stage. An arbitrary convention had decreed that tragic personages must inhabit a world, in which noses exist 
only to distinguish the noble Romans from the Greeks and Hebrews, never to be blown. Arbitrary conventions of 
one sort or another are essential to ar t. But as the sort of convention cons tantly varies, so does the corresponding 
vulgarity. We are back among the relativities. 
 In the case of the handkerchief we ha ve a particular and rather absurd application of a very widely accepted 
artistic convention. This convention is  justified by the ancient metaphysical doctrine, which distinguishes in the 
universe two principles, mind and matter, and which attributes to mind an immeasurable superiority. In the name of 
this principle many religions have demanded the sacrifice of the body; their devotees have responded by mortifying 
the flesh and, in extreme cases, by committing self-castration and even suicide. Literature has its Manichaeans as 
well as religion: men who on principle would exile the body and its functions from the wo rld of their art, who 
condemn as vulgar all too particular and detailed accounts of physical actuality, as vulgar any attempt to relate 
mental or spiritual events to happenings in the body. Th e inhabitants of their univers e are not human beings, but 
the tragical heroes and heroines who never blow their noses. 
 Artistically, the abolition of handkerc hiefs and all that handkerchiefs dire ctly or indirec tly stand for has 
certain advantages. The handkerchiefless world of pure mind and spirit is, for an adult, the nearest approach to that 
infinitely comfortable Freudian wom b, toward which, as toward a lost pa radise, we are always nostalgically 
yearning. In the handkerchiefless mental wo rld we are at liberty to work things  out to their logical conclusions, we 
can guarantee the triumph of justice, we can control th e weather and (in the words of those yearning popular songs 
which are the national anthems of Wo mbland) make our Dreams come True by living under Skies of Blue with 
You. Nature in the mental world is not that collection of tiresomely opaque and recalcitrant objects, so bewildering 
to the man of science, so ma lignantly hostile to the man of action; it is the luminously rational substance of a 
Hegelian nature-philosophy, a symb olic manifestation of the principles of dialectic. Artistically, such a Nature is 
much more satisfactory (because so much more easy to deal  with) than the queer, rather sinister and finally quite 
incomprehensible monster, by which, when we venture out of our ivory towers, we ar e instantly swallowed. And 
man, than whom, as Sophocles long since remarked, nothing is more monstrous, more marvelous, more terrifyingly 
strange (it is hard to find a single word to render his deinoteron) -- man, too, is a very unsatisfactory subject for 
literature. For this creature of inconsistencies can live on t oo many planes of existence. He is the inhabitant of a 
kind of psychological Woolworth Building; you never know -- he never knows himself -- which floor he'll step out 
at tomorrow, nor even whether, a minute from now, he won't take it into his head to jump into the elevator and 
shoot up a dozen or down perhaps twenty  stories into some totally different  mode of being. The effect of the 
Manichaean condemnation of the body is at  once to reduce this impossible skyscrap er to less than half its original

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

60
height. Confined henceforward to the mental floors of his being, man becomes an almost easily manageable subject 
for the writer. In the French tragedies (the most completely  Manichaean works of art ever  created) lust itself has 
ceased to be corporeal and takes its place among the other abstract symbols, with which the authors write their 
strange algebraical equations of passion and conflict. The b eauty of algebraical symbols lies in their universality; 
they stand not for one particular case, but for all cases . Manichaeans, the classical writers confined themselves 
exclusively to the study of ma n as a creature of pure reason and discarna te passions. Now the body particularizes 
and separates, the mind unites. By the very act of impos ing limitations the classicists were enabled to achieve a 
certain universality of statement impossible to thos e who attempt to reproduce the particularities and 
incompletenesses of actual corporeal life. But what they gain ed in universality, they lost in vivacity and immediate 
truth. You cannot get something for nothing. Some people think that universality can be paid for too highly.  
 To enforce their ascetic code the classicists had to devise a system of critical sanctions. Chief among these 
was the stigma of vulgarity attached to all those who insi sted too minutely on the physica l side of man's existence. 
Speak of handkerchiefs in a tragedy? The solecism was as monstrous as picking teeth with a fork. 
 At a dinner party in Paris not long ago I found myself sitting next to a French Professor of English, who 
assured me in the course of an otherwise very agreeab le conversation that I was a leading member of the Neo-
Classic school and that it was as a leading member of the Neo-Classic school that I was lectured about to the 
advanced students of contemporary English literature under his tutelage. The news depressed me. Classified, like a 
museum specimen, and lectured about, I felt most disma lly posthumous. But that was not all. The thought that I 
was a Neo-Classic preyed upon my mind -- a Neo-Classic without knowing it, a Neo-Classic against all my desires 
and intentions. For I have never had the smallest ambiti on to be a Classic of any kind, whether Neo, Palaeo, Proto 
or Eo. Not at any price. For, to be gin with, I have a taste for the lively, the mixed and the incomplete in art, 
preferring it to the universal and the chemically pure. In the second place, I regard the classical discipline, with its 
insistence on elimination, concentration, simplification, as being, for all the formal difficulties it imposes on the 
writer, essentially an escape from, a ge tting out of, the greatest difficulty -- wh ich is to render adequately, in terms 
of literature, that infinitely complex and mysterious thing, actual reality. The worl d of mind is a comfortable 
Wombland, a place to which we flee from the bewildering qu eerness and multiplicity of the actual world. Matter is 
incomparably subtler and more intricat e than mind. Or, to put it a little mo re philosophically, the consciousness of 
events which we have immediately, through our senses and intuitions and feelings, is incomparably subtler than 
any idea we can subsequently form of that immediate c onsciousness. Our most refined theories, our most elaborate 
descriptions are but crude and barbarous simplifications of a reality that is, in every smallest sample, infinitely 
complex. Now, simplifications must, of course, be made; if they were not, it would be quite impossible to deal 
artistically (or, for that matter, scie ntifically) with reality at all. What is the smallest amount of simplification 
compatible with comprehensibility, co mpatible with the expression of a hu manly significant meaning? It is the 
business of the non-classical naturalistic writer to discover. His ambition is to render, in literary terms, the quality 
of immediate experience -- in other words, to express the finally inexpre ssible. To come anywhere near achieving 
this impossibility is much more difficult, it seems to me, than, by eliminating and simplifying, to achieve the 
perfectly realizable classical ideal. The cutting out of all the complex particularities of a situation (which means, as 
we have seen, the cutting out of  all that is corporeal in it ) strikes me as mere artistic  shirking. But I disapprove of 
the shirking of artistic difficulties. Therefore I find myself disapproving of classicism. 
 Literature is also philosophy, is also  science. In terms of beauty it en unciates truths. The beauty-truths of 
the best classical works possess, as we have seen, a cer tain algebraic universality of  significance. Naturalistic 
works contain the more detailed beauty-truths of par ticular observation. These beau ty-truths of art are truly 
scientific. All that modern psychologists, for example, have done is to systematize and de -beautify the vast 
treasures of knowledge about the huma n soul contained in novel, play, poe m and essay. Writers  like Blake and 
Shakespeare, like Stendhal and Dostoevsky, still have plenty to teach the modern scientific professional. There is a 
rich scientific harvest to be reaped in the works even of minor writers. By nature a natural historian, I am ambitious 
to add my quota to the sum of partic ularized beauty-truths about man and hi s relations with the world about him. 
(Incidentally, this world of relations hips, this borderland be tween "subjective" and " objective" is one which 
literature is peculiarly, perhaps uniquel y, well fitted to explore.) I do not want  to be a Classical, or even a Neo-
Classical, eliminator and generalizer. This means, among other things, that I cannot accept the Classicists' 
excommunication of the body. I think it not only permissible, but necessary, that literature should take cognizance

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

61
of physiology and should investigate the still obscure relatio ns between the mind and its body. True, many people 
find the reports of such investigatio ns, when not concealed in scientific  textbooks and couched in the decent 
obscurity of a Graeco-Latin jargon, extremely and in excusably vulgar; and many more find them downright 
wicked. I myself have frequently been accused, by revi ewers in public and by unprofe ssional readers in private 
correspondence, both of vulgarity and of wickedness -- on the grounds, so far as  I have ever been able to discover, 
that I reported my investigations into certain phenomena in plain English and in a novel. The fact that many people 
should be shocked by what he writes practically imposes  it as a duty upon the writer to go on shocking them. For 
those who are shocked by truth are not only stupid, but morally reprehensible as well; the stupid should be 
educated, the wicked punished and reformed. All these prai seworthy ends can be attained by a course of shocking; 
retributive pain will be inflicted on the truth-haters by the first shocking truths, whose repetition will gradually 
build up in those who read them an i mmunity to pain and will end by reform ing and educating the stupid criminals 
out of their truth-hating. For a familiar truth ceases to shock. To render it familiar is therefore a duty. It is also a 
pleasure. For, as Baudelaire says, "ce qu'il y a d'enivrant dans  le mauvais goût, c'est le plaisir aristocratique de 
déplaire." 
 
IV 
 The aristocratic pleasure of disp leasing is not the only delight that bad taste can yiel d. One can love a 
certain kind of vulgarity for its own sake. To overstep ar tistic restraints, to protest too much for the fun of 
baroquely protesting -- such offenses against good taste are int oxicatingly delightful to commit, not because they 
displease other people (for to the great majority they ar e rather pleasing than otherwise), but because they are 
intrinsically vulgar, because the good taste against which they offend is as nearly as possible an absolute good 
taste; they are artistic offenses that have the exciting quality of the sin against the Holy Ghost. 
 It was Flaubert, I think, who descri bed how he was tempted, as he wrote, by swarms of gaudy images and 
how, a new St. Antony, he squashed them ruthlessly, like lice , against the bare wall of his study. He was resolved 
that his work should be adorned only with its own intrinsi c beauty and with no extraneous jewels, however lovely 
in themselves. The saintliness of this ascetic of letters wa s duly rewarded; there is nothing in all Flaubert's writings 
that remotely resembles a vulgarity. Thos e who follow his religion must pray for the strength to imitate their saint. 
The strength is seldom vouchsafed. The temptations which Flaubert put aside are, by any man of lively fancy and 
active intellect, incredibly difficult to be resisted. An imag e presents itself, glittering, iridescent; capture it, pin it 
down, however irrelevantly too brilliant for its context. A phrase, a situation suggests a whole train of striking or 
amusing ideas that fly off at a tangent , so to speak, from the round world on wh ich the creator is at work; what an 
opportunity for saying something witty or profound! True , the ornament will be in the nature of a florid 
excrescence on the total work; but  never mind. In goes the tangent -- or rath er, out into artistic irrelevancy. And in 
goes the effective phrase that is too effective, too highly co lored for what it is to express; in goes the too emphatic 
irony, the too tragical scene, the too pathetic tirad e, the too poetical de scription. If we su ccumb to all these 
delightful temptations, if we make welcome all these gaudy lice instead of squashing them at their first appearance, 
our work will soon glitter like a Sout h American parvenu, dazzling with parasitic ornament, and vulgar. For a self-
conscious artist, there is a most extraordinary pleasure in knowing exactly what the results of showing off and 
protesting too much must be and then  (in spite of this knowledge, or becau se of it) proceeding, deliberately and 
with all the skill at his command, to  commit precisely those vul garities, against which hi s conscience warns him 
and which he knows he will afterwards  regret. To the aristocratic pleasur e of displeasing other people, the 
conscious offender against good taste can add the still more aristocratic pleasure of displeasing himself. . . 
 
V 
 It is vulgar, in literature, to make a display of  emotions which you do not naturally have, but think you 
ought to have, because all the best people do have them. It is also vulgar (and this is the more common case) to 
have emotions, but to express them so badly, with so many too many protestings, that you seem to have no natural 
feelings, but to be merely fabricating emotions by a process of literary forgery. Sincerity in art, as I have pointed 
out elsewhere, is mainly a matter of talent. Keats's love le tters ring true, because he ha d great literary gifts. Most 
men and women are capable of feeling passion, but not of e xpressing it; their love letters (as we learn from the 
specimens read aloud at inquests and mu rder trials, in the divorce court, during breach of promise cases) are either

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

62
tritely flat or tritely bombastic. In either case manifestly insincere, and in the second case also vulgar -- for to 
protest too much is always vulgar, wh en the protestations are so incompetent as not to  carry conviction. And 
perhaps such excessive protestations can never be c onvincing, however accomplished the protester. D'Annunzio, 
for example -- nobody could do a job of writing better than D'Annunzio. But when, as is too often the case, he 
makes much ado about nothing, we find it hard to be convinced either of the importance of the nothing, or of the 
sincerity of the author's emotion about it -- and this in  spite of the incomparable splendor of D'Annunzio's much 
ado. True, excessive pretestings may c onvince a certain public at  a certain time. But when the circumstances, 
which rendered the public sensitive to the force and b lind to the vulgarity of the too much protesting, have 
changed, the protests cease to convince. Mackenzie's Man of Feeling, for example, protests its author's sensibility 
with an extravagance that seems now, not merely vulgar, but positively ludi crous. At the time of its publication 
sentimentality was, for various reasons, extr emely fashionable. Circumstances changed and The Man of Feeling 
revealed itself as vulgar to the point of ridiculousness; and vulgar and ridiculous it has remained ever since and 
doubtless will remain. . . 
 The case of Dickens is a strange one. The really mons trous emotional vulgarity, of which he is guilty now 
and then in all his books and almost continuously in The Old Curiosity Shop, is not the emotional vulgarity of one 
who stimulates feelings which he does not have. It is evident, on the contrary, that Dickens felt most poignantly for 
and with his Little Nell; that he we pt over her sufferings, piously revered her goodness and exulted in her joys. He 
had an overflowing heart; but the trouble was that it overf lowed with such curious and even rather repellent 
secretions. The creator of the later Pickwick and the Ch eeryble Brothers, of Tim Linkinwater the bachelor and Mr. 
Garland and so many other gruesome old Peter Pans was obviously a little abnormal in his emotional reactions. 
There was something rather wrong with  a man who could take this lachrymo se and tremulous pleasure in adult 
infantility. He would doubtless have ju stified his rather fri ghtful emotional taste by a reference to the New 
Testament. But the child-like qualities of character comme nded by Jesus are certainly not  the same as those which 
distinguish the old infants in Dickens's novels. There is all the difference in the world between infants and children. 
Infants are stupid and unaware and subhum an. Children are remarkable for thei r intelligence and ardor, for their 
curiosity, their intolerance of shams, the clarity and ruthlessness of their vi sion. From all accounts Jesus must have 
been child-like, not at all infantil e. A childlike man is not a man whose development has been arrested; on the 
contrary, he is a man who has given hi mself a chance of continuing to develop long after most adults have muffled 
themselves in the cocoon of middle-aged habit and conve ntion. An infantile man is one who has not developed at 
all, or who has regressed to ward the womb, into a comfortable unawar eness. So far from being attractive and 
commendable, an infantile man is really a most repuls ive, because a truly monstrous and misshapen, being. A 
writer who can tearfully adore these stout or cadaverous old babies, snugly ensconced in their mental and economic 
womb-substitutes and sucking, between false teeth, their th umbs, must have something seriously amiss with his 
emotional constitution. 
 One of Dickens's most striking peculiarities is that , whenever in his writing he becomes emotional, he 
ceases instantly to use his intelligence. The overflowing of his heart drowns his head and even dims his eyes; for, 
whenever he is in the melting mood, Dickens ceases to be ab le and probably ceases even to wish to see reality. His 
one and only desire on these occasions is just to overflow, nothing else. Which he does, with a vengeance and in an 
atrocious blank verse that is meant to be poetical prose and succeeds only in being the worst kind of fustian. "When 
Death strikes down the innocent and young, fr om every fragile form from which he  lets the panti ng spirit free, a 
hundred virtues rise, in shapes of merc y, charity and love, to walk the worl d and bless it. Of every tear that 
sorrowing mortals shed on such green graves, some good is  born, some gentler nature comes. In the Destroyer's 
steps there spring up bright creations th at defy his power, and his dark path becomes a way of light to Heaven." 
And so on, a stanchless flux. 
 Mentally drowned and blinded by the sticky overflow ings of his heart, Dick ens was incapable, when 
moved, of re-creating, in terms of ar t, the reality which had moved him,  was even, it would seem, unable to 
perceive that reality. Little Nelly's sufferings and death distressed him as, in real li fe, they would distress any 
normally constituted man; for the suffering and death of children raise the problem of evil in its most unanswerable 
form. It was Dickens's business as a writer to recreate in  terms of his art this distressing reality. He failed. The 
history of Little Nell is distressing indeed, but not as Dickens presumably meant it to be distressing; it is distressing 
in its ineptitude and vulgar sentimentality.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

63
 A child, Ilusha, suffers and dies in Dostoevsky's Brothers Karamazov. Why is this history so agonizingly 
moving, when the tale of Little  Nell leaves us not merely cold, but deri sive? Comparing the tw o stories, we are 
instantly struck by the incomparably greater richness in factual detail of Dostoevsky' s creation. Feeling did not 
prevent him from seeing and recording, or rather re-cre ating. All that happened round Ilusha's deathbed he saw, 
unerringly. The emotion-blinded Dicken s noticed practically nothing of wh at went on in Little Nelly's 
neighborhood during the child's last days. We are almost fo rced, indeed, to believe that he didn't want to see 
anything. He wanted to be unaware hims elf and he wanted his readers to be  unaware of everything except Little 
Nell's sufferings on the one hand and her goodness and innocence on the other. But goodness and innocence and 
the undeservedness of suffering and eve n, to some extent, suffe ring itself are only signifi cant in relation to the 
actual realities of human life. Isolate d, they cease to mean anything, perhaps to  exist. Even the classical writers 
surrounded their abstract and algebraical personages with at leas t the abstract and algebr aical implication of the 
human realities, in relation to which virtues and vices are significant. Thanks to Dickens's pathologically deliberate 
unawareness, Nell's virtues are marooned, as it were, in th e midst of a boundless waste of unreality; isolated, they 
fade and die. Even her sufferings and death lack significan ce because of this isolatio n. Dickens's unawareness was 
the death of death itself. Unawareness,  according to the ethics of Buddhism, is  one of the deadly sins. The stupid 
are wicked. (Incidentally, the cleverest men can, sometimes and in certain circumstances, reveal themselves as 
profoundly -- criminally -- stupid. You can be an acute logician and at the same time an emotional cretin.) Damned 
in the realm of conduct, the unaware are also damned aesth etically. Their art is bad; instead of creating, they 
murder.  
 Art, as I have said, is also philosophy, is also science.  Other things being equal, the work of art which in its 
own way "says" more about the universe will be better than  the work of art which says less. (The "other things" 
which have to be equal are the forms of beauty, in term s of which the artist must express his philosophic and 
scientific truths.) Why is The Rosary a less admirable novel than The Brothers Karamazov? Because the amount of 
experience of all kinds understood, "felt into," as the Germans would say, and artistically recreated by Mrs. Barclay 
is small in comparison with that which Dostoevsky fee lingly comprehended and knew so consummately well how 
to re-create in terms of the novelist's art. Dostoevsky covers all Mrs. Barclay's ground and a vast area beside. The 
pathetic parts of The Old Curiosity Shop are as poor in underst ood and artistic ally re-created experience as The 
Rosary -- indeed, I think they ar e ever poorer. At the same time they are vulgar (which The Rosary, that genuine 
masterpiece of the servants' hall, is not). They are vulga r, because their poverty is a pretentious poverty, because 
their disease (for the quality of Dickens's sentimentality is truly pathological) professes to be the most radiant 
health; because they protest their unin telligence, their lack of understanding w ith a vehemence of florid utterance 
that is not only shocking, but ludicrous. 
(From "Vulgarity in Literature," Music at Night) 
 
 
 
D. H. Lawrence 
 
 It is impossible to write about Lawren ce except as an artist. He was an artis t first of all, and the fact of his 
being an artist explains a life which seems, if you forget it, inexplicably strange. In Son of Woman, Mr. Middleton 
Murry has written at great length a bout Lawrence -- but about a Lawrence w hom you would never suspect, from 
reading that curious essay in destruct ive hagiography, of being an artist. For Mr. Murry almost completely ignores 
the fact that his subject -- his victim, I had almost said -- was one whom "the fates had stigmatized 'writer'." His 
book is Hamlet without the Prince of De nmark -- for all its metaphysical subt leties and its Freudian ingenuities, 
very largely irrelevant. The absurdit y of his critical method becomes the mo re manifest when we reflect that 
nobody would ever have heard of a Lawrence who was not an artist. 
 An artist is the sort of artist he is, because he happens to possess certain gifts. And he  leads the sort of life 
he does in fact lead, because he is an  artist, and an artist with a particul ar kind of mental endowment. Now there 
are general abilities and there are special  talents. A man who is born with a great share of some special talent is 
probably less deeply affected by nurture than one whose ability is generalized. His gift is his fate, and he follows a 
predestined course, from which no ordinary power can deflect him. In spite of Helvetius and Dr. Watson, it seems

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

64
pretty obvious that no amount of education -- including und er that term everything from the Oedipus complex to 
the English Public School system -- could have prevented Mozart from bei ng a musician, or musicianship from 
being the central fact in Mozart's life.  And how would a different education have modified the expression of, say, 
Blake's gift? It is, of course, impossible to answer. One can only express the unverifiable conviction that an art so 
profoundly individual and original, so  manifestly "inspired," would have  remained fundamentally the same 
whatever (within reasonable limits) had been the circum stances of Blake's upbringing. Lawrence, as Mr. F. R. 
Leavis insists, has many affinities w ith Blake. "He had the same gift of knowing what he was interested in, the 
same power of distinguishing his own feelings and emotions from conventional sentiment, the same 'terrifying 
honesty.' " Like Blake, like any man possessed of great  special talents, he was predestined by his gifts. 
Explanations of him in terms of a Fr eudian hypothesis of nurture may be interesting, but they do not explain. That 
Lawrence was profoundly affected by his love for his mother and by her exce ssive love for him, is obvious to 
anyone who has read Sons and Lovers. None the less it is, to me at any rate, almost equally obvious that even if his 
mother had died when he was a child, Lawrence would s till have been, essentially a nd fundamentally, Lawrence. 
Lawrence's biography does not account for Lawrence's achieve ment. On the contrary, his achievement, or rather 
the gift that made the achievement possible, accounts fo r a great deal of his biography. He lived as he lived, 
because he was, intrinsically and from birth, what he was.  If we would write intellig ibly of Lawrence, we must 
answer, with all their implications, two questions: first, what sort of gifts did he have? and secondly, how did the 
possession of these gifts affect the way he responded to experience? 
 Lawrence's special and characteristic  gift was an extraordinary sensitiveness to what Wordsworth called 
"unknown modes of being." He was always intensely awar e of the mystery of the world, and the mystery was 
always for him a numen, divine. Lawrence could never forget, as most of us almost continuously forget, the dark 
presence of the otherness that lies  beyond the boundaries of man's conscious  mind. This special sensibility was 
accompanied by a prodigious power of rendering the immediately experienced otherness in terms of literary art. 
 Such was Lawrence's peculiar gift. Hi s possession of it accounts for many things. It accounts, to begin with, 
for his attitude toward sex. His part icular experiences as a son and as  a lover may have intensified his 
preoccupation with the subjec t; but they certainly did not make it. Whatever his experiences, Lawrence must have 
been preoccupied with sex; his gift made it inevitable. For Lawrence, the significance of the sexual experience was 
this: that, in it, the immedi ate, non-mental knowledge of di vine otherness is brought, so  to speak, to a focus -- a 
focus of darkness. Parodying Matthew Arnold's famous form ula, we may say that sex is something not ourselves 
that makes for -- not righteousness, for the essence of religion is not righteousness; there is a spiritual world, as 
Kierkegaard insists, beyond the ethical -- rather, that ma kes for life, for divineness, for union with the mystery. 
Paradoxically, this something not ourselve s is yet a something lodged within us ; this quintessence of otherness is 
yet the quintessence of our proper being. "And God the Fa ther, the Inscrutable, the Unknowable, we know in the 
flesh, in Woman. She is the door for our  in-going and our out-coming. In her we go back to the Father; but like the 
witnesses of the transfiguration, blin d and unconscious." Yes, blind and uncons cious; otherwise it is a revelation, 
not of divine otherness, but of very  human evil. "The embrace of love, wh ich should bring darkness and oblivion, 
would with these lovers (the hero and heroine of one of Poe's tales) be  a daytime thing, bringing more heightened 
consciousness, visions, spectrum-visions, prismatic. The evil thing that daytime love-making is, and all sex-
palaver!" How Lawrence hated Eleonora and Ligeia and Rode rick Usher and all such soulful Mrs. Shandies, male 
as well as female! What a horror, too, he had of all D on Juans, all knowing sensualis ts and conscious libertines! 
(About the time he was writing Lady Chatterley's Lover he read the memoirs of Casanova, and was profoundly 
shocked.) And how bitterly he loathed the Wilhelm-Meisterish  view of love as an education, as a means to culture, 
a Sandow-exerciser for the soul! To use love in this way, consciously and deliberately, seemed to Lawrence wrong, 
almost a blasphemy. "It seems to me queer," he says to a fellow-writer, "that you prefer to present men chiefly -- as 
if you cared for women not so much for what they were in  themselves as for what the men saw in them. So that 
after all in your work women seem not to have an existence, save they are the projections of the men. . . It's the 
positivity of women you seem to deny -- make them sort of  instrumental." The instrumentality of Wilhelm 
Meister's women shocked Lawrence profoundly. . . 
 For someone with a gift for sensing the mystery of othe rness, true love must nece ssarily be, in Lawrence's 
vocabulary, nocturnal. So must true knowledge. Noctur nal and tactual -- a touching in  the night. Man inhabits, for 
his own convenience, a home-made unive rse within the greater alien worl d of external matter and his own

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

65
irrationality. Out of the illimita ble blackness of that world the light of his customary thinking scoops, as it were, a 
little illuminated cave -- a tunnel of brightness, in which, from the birt h of consciousness to its death, he lives, 
moves and has his being. For most of us  this bright tunnel is the whole worl d. We ignore the outer darkness; or if 
we cannot ignore it, if it presses to o insistently upon us, we disapprove, be ing afraid. Not so Lawrence. He had 
eyes that could see, beyond the walls of light, far into the darkness, sensitive fingers that kept him continually 
aware of the environing mystery. He c ould not be content with the homemade,  human tunnel, could not conceive 
that anyone else should be content with  it. Moreover -- and in this he was unlike those others, to whom the world's 
mystery is continuously present, the gr eat philosophers and men of science --  he did not want to increase the 
illuminated area; he approved of the outer darkness, he felt at home in it. Most men live in a little puddle of light 
thrown by the gig-lamps of habit and their immediate interest; but there is also the pure and powerful illumination 
of the disinterested scientific intellect. To Lawrence, both lights were suspect, both seemed to falsify what was, for 
him, the immediately apprehended reality -- the darkness of mystery. "My great religion," he was already saying in 
1912, "is a belief in the blood, the flesh, as being wiser than  the intellect. We can go wrong in our minds. But what 
the blood feels, and believes, and says, is always true." Li ke Blake, who had prayed to be delivered from "single 
vision and Newton's sleep": like Keats, who had drunk de struction to Newton for ha ving explained the rainbow, 
Lawrence disapproved of too much knowledge, on the score th at it diminished men's sense of wonder and blunted 
their sensitiveness to the great mystery. His dislike of science was passionate and e xpressed itself in the most 
fantastically unreasonable terms.  "All scientists are liars," he would say, when I brought up some experimentally 
established fact, which he happened to dislike. "Liars, liars!" It was a mo st convenient theory. I remember in 
particular one long and violent argument on evolution, in  the reality of which Lawrence always passionately 
disbelieved. "But look at the evidence, Lawrence," I insisted, "look at all the evidence." His answer was 
characteristic. "But I don't care about evidence. Evidence doesn't mean anything to me. I don't feel it here." And he 
pressed his two hands on his solar plexus. I abandoned the argument and thereafter never, if I could avoid it, 
mentioned the hated name of science in his presence. La wrence could give so much, and what he gave was so 
valuable, that it was absurd and profitless to spend one 's time with him disputing about a matter in which he 
absolutely refused to take a rational interest. Whatever the intellectual consequences, he remained through thick 
and thin unshakably loyal to his own genius. The daimon which possessed him was, he felt, a divine thing, which 
he would never deny or explain awa y, never even ask to accept a compromise . This loyalty to his own self, or 
rather to his gift, to the strange and powerful numen which, he felt, used him as its tabernacle, is fundamental in 
Lawrence and accounts, as nothing else can do, for all that the world found stra nge in his beliefs and his behavior. 
It was not an incapacity to understand that made him rej ect those generalizations and abstractions by means of 
which the philosophers and the men of science try to open a path for the human spirit through the chaos of 
phenomena. Not incapacity, I repeat; for Lawrence had, over and above his peculiar gift, an extremely acute 
intelligence. He was a clever man as well as a man of genius. (In his boyhood and adolescence he had been a great 
passer of examinations.) He could have understood the aim and methods of scie nce perfectly well if he had wanted 
to. Indeed, he did understand them perfec tly well; and it was for that very reason that he rejected them. For the 
methods of science and critical philo sophy were incompatible with the exer cise of his gift -- the immediate 
perception and artistic renderi ng of divine otherness. And their aim, wh ich is to push back the frontier of the 
unknown, was not to be reconciled with his aim, which was to remain as in timately as possible in contact with the 
surrounding darkness. And so, in spite of their enormous pr estige, he rejected science and critical philosophy; he 
remained loyal to his gift. Exclusivel y loyal. He would not attempt to qua lify or explain his immediate knowledge 
of the mystery, would not even attemp t to supplement it by other, abstract knowledge. "These terrible, conscious 
birds, like Poe and his Ligeia, deny the very life that is  in them; they want to turn it all into talk, into knowing. And 
so life, which will not be known, le aves them." Lawrence refused to know abstractly. He preferred to live; and he 
wanted other people to live. 
 No man is by nature complete an d universal; he cannot have first-hand knowledge of every kind of possible 
human experience. Universality, therefore, can only be achieved by those who mentally stimulate living experience 
-- by the knowers, in a wor d, by people like Goethe (an artist for whom  Lawrence always felt the most intense 
repugnance). 
 Again, no man is by nature perfect, and none can spontan eously achieve perfection. The greatest gift is a 
limited gift. Perfection, whether ethical or aesthetic, must be the result of know ing and of the laborious application

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

66
of knowledge. Formal aesthetic s are an affair of rules and the best cla ssical models; formal morality, of the ten 
commandments and the imitation of Christ. 
 Lawrence would have nothing to do w ith proceedings so "unnatural," so disloyal to th e gift, to the resident 
or visiting numen. Hence his aesthetic principle, that art must be wholly spontaneous, and, like the artist, imperfect, 
limited and transient. Hence, too, his ethi cal principle, that a man's first mora l duty is not to at tempt to live above 
his human station, or beyond his inherited psychological income. 
 The great work of art and the monument more pere nnial than brass are, in their very perfection and 
everlastingness, inhuman -- too much of a good thing. La wrence did not approve of them. Art, he thought, should 
flower from an immediate impulse toward self-expression or communication, and should wither with the passing of 
the impulse. Of all building materials Lawrence liked adobe the best; its extreme plasticity and extreme 
impermanence endeared it to him. There could be no ever lasting pyramids in adobe, no mathematically accurate 
Parthenons. Nor, thank heaven, in wood. Lawrence loved the Etruscans, among other reasons, because they built 
wooden temples, which have not survive d. Stone oppressed him with its indestru ctible solidity, its capacity to take 
and indefinitely keep the hard uncompromising form s of pure geometry. Great buildings made him feel 
uncomfortable, even when they were beautiful. He felt some thing of the same discomfort  in the presence of any 
highly finished work of art. In music, for example, he  liked the folk-song, because it was a slight thing, born of 
immediate impulse. The symphony oppresse d him; it was too big, too elaborat e, too carefully and consciously 
worked out, too "would-be" -- to use a characteristic Lawrencian expression. He was quite determined that none of 
his writings should be "would-be." He allowed them to flower as they liked from the depths of his being and would 
never use his conscious intellect to fo rce them into a semblance of more than human perfection, or more than 
human universality. It was characteristic  of him that he hardly ever correct ed or patched what he had written. I 
have often heard him say, indeed, that he was incapable of correcting. If he  was dissatisfied with what he had 
written, he did not, as most authors do, file, clip, insert, transpose; he rewrote. In other words, he gave the daimon 
another chance to say what it wanted to say. There are, I be lieve, three complete and totally distinct manuscripts of 
Lady Chatterley's Lover. Nor was this by any means th e only novel that he wrote more than once. He was 
determined that all he produced should spring direct from  the mysterious, irrational s ource of power within him. 
The conscious intellect should never be  allowed to come and impose, after the event, its abstract pattern of 
perfection. 
 It was the same in the sphere of ethics as in that of art. "They want me to have form: that means, they want 
me to have their pernicious, ossiferous skin-and-grief form, and I won't." This was written about his novels; but it 
is just as applicable to his life. Every man, Lawrence insist ed, must be an artist in life, must create his own moral 
form. The art of living is harder than the art of writing. "It is a much more delicate thing to make love, and win 
love, than to declare love." All the more reason, therefore,  for practicing this art with the most refined and subtle 
sensibility; all the more reason for not accepting that  "pernicious skin-and-grief form" of morality, which they are 
always trying to impose on one. It is the business of the sens itive artist in life to accept his own nature as it is, not 
to try to force it into another shape. He must take th e material given him -- the wea knesses and irrationalities, as 
well as the sense and the virtues; the mysterious darkne ss and otherness no le ss than the light of reason and the 
conscious ego -- must take them all and weav e them together into a satisfactory pattern; his pattern, not somebody 
else's pattern. "Once I said to myself : 'How can I blame -- why be angry?'. . . Now I say: 'When anger comes with 
bright eyes, he may do his will. In me he will hardly shake off the hand of God. He is one of the archangels, with a 
fiery sword. God sent him -- it is be yond my knowing.' " This was written in  1910. Even at the very beginning of 
his career Lawrence was envi saging man as simply the locus of a polyt heism. Given his pa rticular gifts of 
sensitiveness and of expression it was inevitable. Just as  it was inevitable that a man of Blake's peculiar genius 
should formulate the very similar doctrine of the inde pendence of states of being. All the generally accepted 
systems of philosophy and of ethics aim at policing man's polytheism in the na me of some Jehovah of intellectual 
and moral consistency. For Lawrence this was an indefens ible proceeding. One god had as much right to exist as 
another, and the dark ones were as genuinely divine as  the bright. Perhaps (since Lawrence was so specially 
sensitive to the quality of dark godhead and so specially gifted to expr ess it in art), perhaps even more divine. 
Anyhow, the polytheism was a democracy. This conception of human nature re sulted in the formulation of two 
rather surprising doctrines, one  ontological and the other ethical. The fi rst is what I may call the Doctrine of 
Cosmic Pointlessness. "There is no point. Life and Love ar e life and love, a bunch of violets is a bunch of violets,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

67
and to drag in the idea of a point is to ruin everything. Live and let live, love and let love, flower and fade, and 
follow the natural curve, which flows on, pointless." 
 Ontological pointlessness has its ethi cal counterpart in the doctrine of insouciance. "They simply are eaten 
up with caring. They are so busy caring about Fascism or Leagues of Nations or whether France is right or whether 
Marriage is threatened, that they never know where they ar e. They certainly never live on the spot where they are. 
They inhabit abstract space, the desert void of politics principles right and wrong, and so forth. They are doomed to 
be abstract. Talking to them is like trying to  have a human relationship with the letter x in algebra." As early as 
1911 his advice to his sister was: "Don't meddle with religion. I would leave all that alone, if I were you, and try to 
occupy myself fully in the present." 
 Lawrence's dislike of abstract knowledge and pure spir ituality made him a kind of mystical materialist. 
Thus, the moon affects him strongly; therefore it cannot be  a "stony cold world, like a world of our own gone cold. 
Nonsense. It is a globe of dynamic substance, like ra dium or phosphorus, coagulated upon a vivid pole of energy." 
Matter must be intrinsica lly as lively as the mind wh ich perceives it and is move d by the perception. Vivid and 
violent spiritual effects must have correspondingly vivid an d violent material causes. And, conversely, any violent 
feeling or desire in the mind must be capable of producing vi olent effects upon external matter. Lawrence could 
not bring himself to believe that the spirit can be move d, moved even to madness, wit hout imparting the smallest 
corresponding movement to the external world. He was a s ubjectivist as well as a materi alist; in other words, he 
believed in the possibility, in some form or another, of magic.  Lawrence's mystical materialism found 
characteristic expression the curious cosmology and physiology of his speculative essays, and in his restatement of 
the strange Christian doctrine of the resurrection of the body. To his mind, the survival of the spirit was not 
enough; for the spirit is a man's conscious identity, and Lawrence did not want to be always identical to himself; he 
wanted to know otherness -- to kno w it by being it, know it in  the living flesh, which is always essentially other. 
Therefore there must be a resurrection of the body. 
 Loyalty to his genius left him no choice; Lawrence had to insist on thos e mysterious forces of otherness 
which are scattered without, and darkly concentrated within, the body and mind of man. He had to, even though, by 
doing so, he imposed upon himself, as a writer of novels, a very serious handicap. For according to his view of 
things most of men's activities were more or less criminal distractions from the proper busin ess of human living. 
He refused to write of such distractions; that is to say, he refused to write of the main activities of the contemporary 
world. But as though this drastic limitation of his subject were  not sufficient, he went st ill further and, in some of 
his novels, refused even to write of human pe rsonalities in the accepted sense of the term. The Rainbow and 
Women in Love (and indeed to a lesser extent all his novels) are the practical applicat ions of a theory, which is set 
forth in a very interesting and important letter to Edward Garnett, dated June 5th, 1914. "S omehow, that which is 
physic -- non-human in humanity, is more  interesting to me than the old-fa shioned human element, which causes 
one to conceive a character in a certain moral scheme and make him consistent. The certain moral scheme is what I 
object to. In Turgenev, and in Tolstoi, and in Dostoievsky, the moral scheme into which all the characters fit -- and 
it is nearly the same scheme -- is, whatever the extraord inariness of the characters themselves, dull, old, dead. 
When Marinetti writes: 'It is the solidity of a blade of steel  that is interesting in itself, that is, the incomprehending 
and inhuman alliance of its molecules in resistance to, let us say, a bullet. The heat of a piece of wood or iron is in 
fact more passionate, for us, than the la ughter or tears of a woman' -- then I know  what he means. He is stupid, as 
an artist, for contrasting the heat of the iron and the laugh of the woman. Because what is interesting in the laugh of 
the woman is the same as the binding of the molecules of steel or their action in heat: it is the inhuman will, call it 
physiology, or like Marinetti, physiology of matter, that fascinates me. I don't so much care about what the woman 
feels -- in the ordinary usage of the word. That presumes an ego to feel with. I only care about what the woman is -- 
what she Is -- inhumanly, physiologically, materially -- according to the use of the word. . . You mustn't look in my 
novel for the old stable ego of the character. There is another ego, according to whose acti on the individual is 
unrecognizable, and passes through, as it  were, allotropic states which it need s a deeper sense than any we've been 
used to exercise, to discove r are states of the same si ngle radically unchanged element. (Like as diamond and coal 
are the same pure single element of carbon. The ordinary novel would trace the history of the diamond -- but I say, 
'Diamond, what! This is carbon.' And my diamond might be coal or soot, and my theme is carbon.)". . . 
 Lawrence, then, possessed, or, if you care to put it th e other way round, was possessed by, a gift -- a gift to 
which he was unshakably loyal. I have tried to show how the possession and the loyalty influenced his thinking and

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

68
writing. How did they affect his life? The answer shall be, as far as possible, in Lawrence's own words. To 
Catherine Carswell Lawrence once wrote:  "I think you are the only woman I ha ve met who is so intrinsically 
detached, so essentially separate and isol ated, as to be a real writer or artist or recorder. Your re lations with other 
people are only excursions from yourself. And to want children, and common human fulfillments, is rather a falsity 
for you, I think. You were never made to 'meet and mingle,' but to remain intact, essentially, whatever your 
experiences may be." 
 Lawrence's knowledge of "the arti st" was manifestly personal knowle dge. He knew by actual experience 
that the "real writer" is an essentially separate be ing, who must not desire to meet and mingle and who betrays 
himself when he hankers too yearningl y after common human fulfillments. All artists know these facts about their 
species, and many of them have recorded their knowledge. Recorded it, very often, with distress; being intrinsically 
detached is no joke. Lawrence certainly  suffered his whole life from the es sential solitude to which his gift 
condemned him. "What ails me," he wrote to the psycholog ist, Dr. Trigant Burrow, "is the absolute frustration of 
my primeval societal instinct. . . I think societal instinct  much deeper than sex instinct -- and societal repression 
much more devastating. There is no repression of the sexual individual comparable to the repression of the societal 
man in me, by the individual ego, my own and everybody else's. . . Myself, I suffer badly fr om being so cut off. . . 
At times one is forced to be essentially a hermit. I don't want to be. Bu t anything else is either a personal tussle, or 
a money tussle; sickening: except, of course, just for ordinary acquaintance,  which remains acquaintance. One has 
no real human relations -- that is so devastating." One has no real human relations: it is the complaint of every 
artist. The artist's first duty is to his genius, his daimon; he cannot serve two masters.  Lawrence, as it happened, 
had an extraordinary gift for establ ishing an intimate relations hip with almost anyone he met. "Here" (in the 
Bournemouth boarding-house where he was staying after his illness, in 1912), "I get mixed up in people's lives so -
- it's very interesting, sometimes a bit painful, often jo lly. But I run to such close intimacy with folk, it is 
complicating. But I love to have myself in a bit of a tangle." His love for his art was greater, however, than his love 
for a tangle; and whenever the tangle threatened to compro mise his activities as an artist, it was the tangle that was 
sacrificed: he retired. Lawrence's only deep and abiding human relationship wa s with his wife. ("It is hopeless for 
me," he wrote to a fellow-artist, "to tr y to do anything without I have a woman at the back of me. . . Böcklin -- or 
somebody like him -- daren't sit in a café except with his back to  the wall. I daren't sit in the world without a 
woman behind me. . . A woman that I l ove sort of keeps me in direct communication with the unknown, in which 
otherwise I am a bit lost.") For the rest , he was condemned by his gift to an essential separateness. Often, it is true, 
he blamed the world for his exile. "And it comes to this, that the oneness of mankind is destroyed in me (by the 
war). I am I, and you are you, and all heaven and hell lie in the chasm between. Believe me, I am infinitely hurt by 
being thus torn off from the body of manki nd, but so it is and it is right." It was right because, in reality, it was not 
the war that had torn him from the body of mankind; it was his own talent, the strange divinity to which he owed 
his primary allegiance. "I will not live any more in this time," he wrote on another o ccasion. "I know what it is. I 
reject it. As far as I possibly can, I will stand outside this time. I will live my life and, if possible, be happy. 
Though the whole world slides in horror dow n into the bottomless pit. . . I believ e that the highest virtue is to be 
happy, living in the great est truth, not submitting to the falsehood of these persona l times." The adjective is 
profoundly significant. Of all the possible words of disp aragement which might be applied to our uneasy age 
"personal" is surely about the last that would occur to mo st of us. To Lawrence it was the first. His gift was a gift 
of feeling and rendering the unknown, the mysteriously ot her. To one possessed by such a gift, almost any age 
would have seemed unduly and dangerously  personal. He had to reject and es cape. But when he had escaped, he 
could not help deploring the absence of  "real human relationships." Spasmodi cally, he tried to establish contact 
with the body of mankind. There were the recurrent projects for colonies in remote corners of the earth; they all fell 
through. . . 
 It was, I think, the sense of being cut off that se nt Lawrence on his restless wanderings round the earth. His 
travels were at once a flight and a sear ch: a search for some society with which he could establish contact, for a 
world where the times were not personal and conscious kno wing had not yet perverted liv ing; a search and at the 
same time a flight from the miseries and evils of the society into which he had been born, and for which, in spite of 
his artist's detachment, he could not help feeling profoundly responsible. He felt himself "English in the teeth of all 
the world, even in the teeth of Engla nd": that was why he had to go to Ceyl on and Australia and Mexico. He could 
not have felt so intensely English in England without involving himself in corporat ive political action, without

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

69
belonging and being attached; but to attach himself was something he could not bring himself to do, something that 
the artist in him felt as a violation. He was at once too English and too intensely an artist to stay at home. "Perhaps 
it is necessary for me to try these places, perhaps it is my destiny to know the world. It only excites the outside of 
me. The inside it leaves more isolated and stoic than ever. That's how it is. It  is all a form of running away from 
oneself and the great problems, all this wild west and the strange Australia. But I try to keep quite clear. One forms 
not the faintest inward attachment, especially here in America." 
 His search was as fruitless as his flight was ineffec tive. He could not escape either from his homesickness 
or his sense of responsibility; and he never found a societ y to which he could belong. In a kind of despair, he 
plunged yet deeper into the surrounding mystery, into the dark night of that otherness whose essence and symbol is 
the sexual experience. In Lady Chatterley's Lover Lawrence wrote the epilogue to his travels and, from his long 
and fruitless experience of flight and search, drew what was, for him, the inevitable moral. It is a strange and 
beautiful book; but inexpressibly sad. But then so, at bottom, was its author's life. 
 Lawrence's psychological isolation resulted, as we ha ve seen, in his seeking physical isolation from the 
body of mankind. This physical isolation reacted upon his thoughts. "D on't mind if I am impertinent," he wrote to 
one of his correspondents at the end of a rather dogmatic letter. "Living here al one one gets so different -- sort of 
ex-cathedra." To live in isolation, above the medley, has its advantages; but it also imposes certain penalties. Those 
who take a bird's-eye view of the worl d often see clearly and comprehensively; but they tend to ignore all tiresome 
details, all the difficulties of social life and, ignoring, to judge too sweepingly and to condemn too lightly. . . 
 Enough of explanation and interpreta tion. To those who knew Lawrence, not why, but that he was what he 
happened to be, is the important fact. I remember very clearly my first m eeting with him. The place was London, 
the time 1915. But Lawrence's passionate talk was of the geographically remote and of the personally very near. Of 
the horrors in the middle distance -- war, winter, the to wn -- he would not speak. For he was on the point, so he 
imagined, of setting off to Florida -- to  Florida, where he was going to plant that colony of escape, of which up to 
the last he never ceased to dream. Sometimes the name and site of this seed of a happier and different world were 
purely fanciful. It was called Rananim, for example, and was an island like Prospero's. Sometimes it had its place 
on the map and its name was Florida, Cornwall, Sicily, Mexico and again, for a time, the English countryside. That 
wintry afternoon in 1915 it was Florida. Before tea was ove r he asked me if I would join the colony, and though I 
was an intellectually cautious young ma n, not at all inclined to enthusiasms, though Lawrence had startled and 
embarrassed me with sincerities of a kind to which my upbringing had not accustomed me, I answered yes. 
 Fortunately, no doubt, the Florida scheme fell thr ough. Cities of God have always crumbled; and 
Lawrence's city -- his village, rather , for he hated cities -- his Village of the Dark God would doubtless have 
disintegrated like all the rest. It was better that it should have remained, as  it was always to remain, a project and a 
hope. And I knew this even as I said I would join th e colony. But there was someth ing about Lawrence which 
made such knowledge, when one was in his presence, curiously irrelevant. He might propose impracticable 
schemes, he might say or write things  that were demonstrably incorrect or  even, on occasion (as when he talked 
about science), absurd. But to a very considerable extent it didn't matter.  What mattered was always Lawrence 
himself, was the fire that burned within him, that glowed with so strange a nd marvelous a radiance in almost all he 
wrote. 
 My second meeting with Lawrence took place some years later, during one of his brief revisitings of that 
after-war England, which he had come so  much to dread and to dislike. Then in 1925, while in India, I received a 
letter from Spotorno. He had read some  essays I had written on Italian trav el; said he liked them; suggested a 
meeting. The next year we were in Florence and so was he . From that time, till his death, we were often together -- 
at Florence, at Forte dei Marmi, for a whole winter at Diablerets, at Bandol, in Paris, at Chexbres, at Forte again, 
and finally at Vence where he died. 
 In a spasmodically kept diary I find this entry un der the date of December 27th, 1927: "Lunched and spent 
the p.m. with the Lawrences. D. H. L. in admirable form , talking wonderfully. He is one  of the few people I feel 
real respect and admiration for. Of most other eminent people I have met I feel that at any rate I belong to the same 
species as they do. But this man has something different and superior in kind, not degree." 
 "Different and superior in kind."  I think almost everyone who knew him well must have felt that Lawrence 
was this. A being, somehow, of another order, more sensitiv e, more highly conscious, more capable of feeling than 
even the most gifted of common men. He had, of course, his weaknesses a nd defects; he had his intellectual

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

70
limitations -- limitations which he seemed to have de liberately imposed upon himself. But these weaknesses and 
defects and limitations did not affect the fact of his superior otherness. They  diminished him quantitively, so to 
speak; whereas the otherness was qualitative. Spill half your glass of wine and what rema ins is still wine. Water, 
however full the glass may be, is always tasteless and without color. 
 To be with Lawrence was a kind of  adventure, a voyage of discovery into newness and otherness. For, 
being himself of a different order, he inhabited a differe nt universe from that of common men -- a brighter and 
intenser world, of which, while he spoke, he would make you free. He looked at things with the eyes, so it seemed, 
of a man who had been at the brink of death and to whom, as he emerges from the darkness, the world reveals itself 
as unfathomably beautiful and mysterious. For Lawrence,  existence was one continuous  convalescence; it was as 
though he were newly reborn from a mort al illness every day of his life. What these conva lescent eyes saw, his 
most casual speech would reveal. A walk with him in the country was a walk through that marvelously rich and 
significant landscape which is at once th e background and the principal personage of all his novels. He seemed to 
know, by personal experience, what it was lik e to be a tree or a daisy or a br eaking wave or even the mysterious 
moon itself. He could get inside the skin of an animal and tell you in the most convincing detail how it felt and 
how, dimly, inhumanly, it thought. Of Black-Eyed Susan, for example, the cow at his New Mexican ranch, he was 
never tired of speaking, nor was I ever tired of listening to his account of her character and her bovine philosophy. 
 "He sees," Vernon Lee once said to me, "more than  a human being ought to see. Perhaps," she added, 
"that's why he hates humanity so much." Why also he  loved it so much. And not only humanity: nature too, and 
even the supernatural. For wherever he looked, he saw more than a human being ought to see; saw more and 
therefore loved and hated more. To be with him was to find oneself transporte d to one of the frontiers of human 
consciousness. For an inhabitant of the safe metropolis of thought and feeling it was a most exciting experience. 
(From "D. H. Lawrence," The Olive Tree) 
 
 
 
Famagusta or Paphos 
 
 Famagusta reminded me irresistibly of Metro-Goldw yn-Mayer's back lot at Culver City. There, under the 
high fog of the Pacific, one used to wander between the f açades of Romeo and Juliet's Verona into Tarzan's jungle, 
and out again, through Bret Harte, into Harun al-Rashid and Pride and Prejudice. Here, in Cyprus, the mingling of 
styles and epochs is no less extravagant, and the sets are not merely realistic -- they are real. At Salamis, in the 
suburbs of Famagusta, one can shoot Quo Vadis against a background of solid masonry and genuine marble. And 
downtown, overlooking the harbor, stands  the Tower of Othello (screen play  by William Shakespeare, additional 
dialogue by Louella Katz); and the Tower of Othello is not the cardboard gazebo to which the theater has 
accustomed us, but a huge High Renaissance gun emplacement that forms part of a defense system as massive, 
elaborate and scientific as the Maginot  Line. Within the circuit of those pr odigious Venetian walls lies the blank 
space that was once a flourishing city -- a blank space with a few patches of modern Turkish squalor, a few 
Byzantine ruins and, outdoing all the rest in intrinsi c improbability, the Mosque. Flanked by the domes and 
colonnades of a pair of pretty little  Ottoman buildings, the Mosque is a ma gnificent piece of thirteenth-century 
French Gothic, with a factory chimney, the minaret, tack ed onto the north end of its façade. Golden and warm 
under the Mediterranean blue, this lesser Chartres rises from the midst of palms and carob trees and Oriental coffee 
shops. The muezzin (reinforced -- for this is the twentieth century -- by loud-speakers) calls from his holy smoke 
stack, and in what was once the Cathedral of St. Nicholas, the Faithful -- or, if you prefer, the Infidels -- pray not to 
an image or an altar, but toward Mecca. 
 We climbed back into the car. "Paphos," I said to th e chauffeur, as matter-of-fac tly as in more familiar 
surroundings one would say, "Selfridge's,"  or "the Waldorf-Astoria." But the birthplace of Venus, it turned out, 
was a long way off and the afternoon wa s already half spent. Besides, th e driver assured us (and the books 
confirmed it) there was really nothing to see at Paphos. Better go home and read about the temple and its self-
mutilated priests in Frazer. Better still, read nothing, but  emulating Mallarmé, write a sonnet on the magical name. 
Mes bouquins refermés sur le nom de Paphos. "My folios closing on the name of Paphos, What fun, with nothing 
but genius, to elect A ruin blest by a thousand foams be neath The hyacinth of its triumphal days! Let the cold

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

71
come, with silence like a scythe! I'll wail no dirge if, level with the ground, This white, bright frolic should deny to 
all Earth's sites the honor of the fancied scene. My hunger, feasting on no mortal fruits, fi nds in their studied lack 
an equal savor. Suppose one bright with flesh, human and fragrant! My foot upon some snake where our love stirs 
the fire, I dream much longer, passionately perhaps, Of the other fruit, the Amazon's burnt breast." 
 
 Mes bouquins refermés sur le nom de Paphos, 
 Il m'amuse d'élire avec le seul génie 
 Une ruine, par mille écumes bénie 
 Sous l'hyacinthe, au loin, de ses jours triomphaux. 
 
 Coure le froid avec ses silences de faux,  
 Je n'y hululerai pas de vide nénie  
 Si ce très blanc ébat au ras du sol dénie  
 À tout site l'honneur du paysage faux. 
 
 Ma faim qui d'aucuns fruits ici ne se régale  
 Trouve en leur docte manque une saveur égale:  
 Qu'un éclate de chair humain et parfumant! 
 
 Le pied sur quelque guivre où notre amour tisonne,  
 Je pense plus longtemps, peut-être éperdument  
 À l'autre, au sein brûlé d une antique amazone.  
 
How close this is to Keats's: 
 
 Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard  
 Are sweeter; therefore, ye soft pipes, play on;  
 Not to the sensual ear, but, more endeared,  
 Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone.  
 
 Parodying the Grecian Urn in terms of Mallarmé's Am azonian metaphor, we have: "Felt breasts are round, 
but those unfelt are rounder; therefore, absent paps, swell on." And the Keatsian formula can be applied just as well 
to Paphos. "Seen archeological remains are interesting; but  those unseen are more impre ssively like what the ruins 
of Aphrodite's birthplace ought to be." All of which, in a judicial summi ng up, may be said to be, on the one hand, 
profoundly true and, on the other, complete ly false. Unvisited ruins, ditties of no tone, the solipsistic love of non-
existent bosoms -- these are all chemically pure, uncontamin ated by those grotesque or horrible irrelevances which 
Mallarmé called "blasphemies" and which are the very stuff and substance of real life in a body. But this kind of 
chemical purity (the purity, in Mallarméan phraseology, of dr eam and Azure) is not the same as the saving purity 
of the Pure in Heart; this re nunciation of irrelevant actual ity is not the poverty in whic h the Poor in Spirit find the 
Kingdom of Heaven. Liberation is for those who react correc tly to given reality, not to their own, or other people's 
notions and fancies. Enlightenment is not for the Quietis ts and Puritans who, in their different ways, deny the 
world, but for those who have learned to accept and transf igure it. Our own private s ilences are better, no doubt, 
than the heard melodies inf licted upon us by the juke box. But are they better than Adieu m'Amour or the slow 
movement of the second Razumovsky Quartet? Unless we  happen to be greater musicians than Dufay or 
Beethoven, the answer is, emphatically, No. And what about a love so chemically pure that it finds in the studied 
lack of fruits a savor equal or  superior to that of human fl esh? Love is a cognitive proce ss, and in this case nuptial 
knowledge will be only a knowledge of the lover's imagination in its relations to his physiology. And it is the same 
with the stay-at-home knowledge of dist ant ruins. In certain cas es -- and the case of Paphos , perhaps, is one of 
them -- fancy may do a more obviously pl easing job than archeological research  or a sightseer's visit. But, in 
general, imagination falls immeasurably short of the inventions of Nature and History. By no possibility could I, or 
even a great poet like Mallarmé, have fabricated Salamis-Famagusta. To whic h, of course, Mallarmé would have 
answered that he had no more wish to  fabricate Salamis-Famagusta than to reproduce the real, historical Paphos. 
The picturesque detail, the unique and concrete datum -- these held no interest for the poet whose advice to himself 
and others was: "Exclude th e real, because vile; exclude the too precise meaning and rature ta vague littérature," 
correct your literature until it becomes (from the realist's point of vi ew) completely vague. Mallarmé defined

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

72
literature as the antithesis of journalism. Literature, for him, is neve r a piece of reporting, never an account of a 
chose vue -- a thing seen in the external world or even a thin g seen, with any degree of precision, by the inner eye. 
Both classes of seen things are t oo concretely real for poetry and must  be avoided. Heredity and a visual 
environment conspired to make of Mallarmé a Manich ean Platonist, for whom the world of appearances was 
nothing or worse than nothing, and the Ideal World everyt hing. Writing in 1867 from Besançon where, a martyr to 
Secondary Education, he was teaching English to a pack of savage boys who found him boring and ridiculous, he 
described to his friend Henri Cazalis the consummation of  a kind of philosophical conversion. "I have passed 
through an appalling year. Thought has come to think itsel f, and I have reached a Pure Conception. . . I am now 
perfectly dead and the impurest region in which my spirit can venture is Eternity. . . I am now impersonal and no 
longer the Stéphane you have known -- but the Spiritual Universe's capacity to see and develop itself through that 
which once was I." In another histori cal context Mallarmé could have de voted himself to Quietism, to the 
attainment of a Nirvana apart from a nd antithetical to the world of appear ances. But he lived under the Second 
Empire and the Third Republic; such a course was out of the question. Besides, he was a poet and, as such, 
dedicated to the task of "giving a purer meaning to the words of the tribe" -- un sens plus pur aux mots de la tribu. 
 "Words," he wrote, "are already sufficiently themselv es not to receive any further impression from outside." 
This "outside," this world of appearances, was to be reduced to nothing, and a world of autonomous and, in some 
sort, absolute words substituted for it. In other, Mallar méan words, "the pure cup of no liquor but inexhaustible 
widowhood announces a rose in the darkness " -- a mystic rose of purged, immaculate language that is, in some 
sort, independent of the given realities for which it is suppo sed to stand, that exists in  its own right, according to 
the laws of its own being. These laws are simultaneousl y syntactical, musical, etymol ogical and philosophical. To 
create a poem capable of living autonomously according to these laws is an undertaking to which only the literary 
equivalent of a great contemplative sa int is equal. Such a saint-surrogate  was Mallarmé -- the most devout and 
dedicated man of letters who ever lived. But "patriotism is not enough." Nor are letters. The poet's cup can be filled 
with something more substantial than words and inexha ustible widowhood, and still rema in undefiled. It would be 
possible, if one were sufficiently gifted, to write a sonnet about Salamis-Famagusta as it really is, in all the wild 
incongruous confusion left by three thousand years of history -- a sonnet that should be as perfect a work of art, as 
immaculate and, though referring to th e world of appearances, as self-suffi cient and absolute as that which 
Mallarmé wrote on the name of Paphos and the fact of absence. All I can do, alas, is to describe and reflect upon 
this most improbable reality in words a l ittle less impure, perhaps, than those of the tribe, and in passing to pay my 
homage to that dedicated denier of reality, that self-mortified saint of letters, whose art enchants me as much today 
as it did forty years ago when, as an undergraduate, I first discovered it . Dream, azure, blasphemy, studied lack, 
inexhaustible widowhood -- fiddlesticks! But how incredibly beautiful are the verbal obj ects created in order to 
express this absurd philosophy! 
 
 Tel qu'en Lui-même enfin l'éternité le change. . . 
 
 Get unanime blanc conflit 
 D'une guirlande avec la même. . . 
 
 Le pur vase d'aucun breuvage  
 Que l'inexhaustible veuvage. . . 
 
 O si chère de loin et proche et blanche, si  
 Délicieusement toi, Mary, que je songe  
 À quelque baume rare émané par mensonge  
 Sur aucun bouquetier de cristal obscurci. . .  
 
 Treasures of sound and syntax, such line s are endowed with some of the intense thereness of natural objects 
seen by the transfiguring eye of the l over or the mystic. Utterly dissimilar fr om the given marvels of the world, 
they are yet, in some obscure way, the equivalents of the first leaves in springtime, of a spray of plum blossom seen 
against the sky, of moss growing thick and velvety on the sunless side of oaks, of a seagull riding the wind. The 
very lines in which Mallarmé exhorts the poet to shut his eyes to given reality pa rtake, in some measure at least, of 
that reality's divine and apocalyptic nature.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

73
 
 Ainsi le choeur des romances 
 À la levre vole-t-il  
 Exclus-en si tu commences  
 Le réel parce que vil  
 Le sens trop précis rature  
 Ta vague littérature.  
 
 Reading, one smiles with pleasure -- smiles with th e same smile as is evoked by the sudden sight of a 
woodpecker on a tree trunk, of a hummingbird poised on the vibration of its wings before a hibiscus flower. 
(From Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow) 
 
 
 
PAINTING 
 
 
 
Breughel 
 
 Most of our mistakes are fundamentally gramma tical. We create our own difficulties by employing an 
inadequate language to describe facts. Thus, to take one example, we are constantly giving the same name to more 
than one thing, and more than one name to the same thing. The results, when we come to argue, are deplorable. For 
we are using a language which does not adequately describe the things about which we are arguing. 
 The word "painter" is one of those names whose indiscriminate application has led to the worst results. All 
those who, for whatever reason and with  whatever intentions, put brushes to  canvas and make pictures, are called 
without distinction, painters. Deceived by the uniqueness of the name, aesthetici ans have tried to make us believe 
that there is a single painter-psychology, a single func tion of painting, a single sta ndard of criticism. Fashion 
changes and the views of art critics with  it. At the present time it is fashionable to believe in form to the exclusion 
of subject. Young people almost swoon aw ay with excess of aesthetic emoti on before a Matisse. Two generations 
ago they would have been wiping their eyes before the latest La ndseer. (Ah, those more than human, those 
positively Christ-like dogs -- how they moved, what lessons they taught! There had been no religious painting like 
Landseer's since Carlo Dolci died.) 
 These historical considerations shou ld make us chary of believing too exclusively in any single theory of 
art. One kind of painting, one set of  ideas are fashionable at any given mo ment. They are made the basis of a 
theory which condemns all other kinds of painting and a ll preceding critical theories . The process constantly 
repeats itself. 
 At the present moment, it is true, we have achieved an unprecedently tolerant eclecticism. We are able, if 
we are up-to-date, to enjoy everyt hing, from Negro sculpture to Loc ca della Robbia and from Magnasco to 
Byzantine mosaics. But it is an eclecticism achieved at th e expense of almost the whole content of the various 
works of art considered. What we have learned to see in a ll these works is their formal qualities, which we abstract 
and arbitrarily call essential. The subject of the work, with  all that the painter desired to express in it beyond his 
feelings about formal relations, co ntemporary criticism rejects as unim portant. The young painter scrupulously 
avoids introducing into his pictures anything that might be mistaken for a story, or the e xpression of a view of life, 
while the young Kunstforscher turns, as though at an act of exhibitionism, from any manifestation by a 
contemporary of any such forbidden interest in dram a or philosophy. True, the ol d masters are indulgently 
permitted to illustrate stories and express their thoughts a bout the world. Poor devils, they knew no better! Your 
modern observer makes allowance for thei r ignorance and passes over in silence all that is not a matter of formal 
relations. The admirers of Giotto (as numerous today as were the admirers of Guido Reni a hundred years ago) 
contrive to look at the master's frescoes without consider ing what they represent, or what the painter desired to 
express. Every germ of drama or meaning is disinfected  out of them; only the composition is admired. The process 
is analogous to reading Latin verses without understanding them -- simply for the sa ke of the rhythmical rumbling

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

74
of the hexameters. 
 It would be absurd, of course, to  deny the importance of formal rela tions. No picture can hold together 
without composition and no good painter is without some specific passion for form as such -- just as no good writer 
is without a passion for words and the ar rangement of words. It is obvious that no man can adequately express 
himself, unless he takes an interest in the terms which he proposes to use as his medium of expression. Not all 
painters are interested in the same sort of forms. Some, for example, have a passion for masses and the surfaces of 
solids. Others delight in lines. Some compose in three di mensions. Others like to ma ke silhouettes on the flat. 
Some like to make the surface of the paint smooth and, as it we re, translucent, so that the objects represented in the 
picture can be seen distinct and separate, as through a sh eet of glass. Others (as for example Rembrandt) love to 
make a rich thick surface which shall ab sorb and draw together into one whole all the objects represented, and that 
in spite of the depth of the compositi on and the distance of the objects from the plane of the picture. All these 
purely aesthetic considerations are, as I have said, important. All artists are interested in them; but almost none are 
interested in them to the exclusion of everything else. It  is very seldom indeed that  we find a painter who can be 
inspired merely by his interest in form and texture to paint a picture. Good painters of "abstract" subjects or even of 
still lives are rare. Apples and solid geometry do not stimulate a man to express his feelings about form and make a 
composition. All thoughts and emotions are interdependent. In the words of the dear old song, 
 
 The roses round the door  
 Make me love mother more.  
 
 One feeling is excited by another. Our faculties wo rk best in a congenial emotional atmosphere. For 
example, Mantegna's faculty for making noble arrangements of forms was stimulated by his feelings about heroic 
and god-like humanity. Expressing those feelings, which he  found exciting, he also expr essed -- and in the most 
perfect manner of which he was capable -- his feelings about masses, surfaces, solids, and voids. "The roses round 
the door" -- his hero worship -- "made him love mother  more" -- made him, by stimulating his faculty for 
composition, paint better. If Isabella d' Este had made him paint apples, table napkins and bottles, he would have 
produced, being uninterested in these obj ects, a poor composition. And yet, from a purely formal point of view, 
apples, bottles and napkins are quite as interesting as human bodies and faces. But Mantegna -- and with him the 
majority of painters -- did not happen to be very passion ately interested in these inanimate objects. When one is 
bored one becomes boring. 
 
 The apples round the door 
 Make me a frightful bore.  
 
 Inevitably; unless I happen to be so exclusively interest ed in form that I can paint anything that has a shape; 
or unless I happen to possess some measure of that queer pantheism, that animistic superstition which made Van 
Gogh regard the humblest of common objects as being divinely or devilishly alive. "Crains dans le mur aveugle un 
regard qui t'épie." If a painter can do that, he will be able, like Van Gogh, to make pictures of cabbage fields and 
the bedrooms of cheap hotels that shall be as wildly dramatic as a Rape of the Sabines. 
 The contemporary fashion is to admire beyond all others  the painter who can concentrate on the formal side 
of his art and produce pictures which are entirely devoid of lite rature. Old Renoir's apophthegm, "Un peintre, 
voyez-vous, qui a le sentiment du téton et des fesses, est un homme sauvé," is considered by the purists suspiciously 
latitudinarian. A painter who has the sentiment of the pa p and the buttocks is a painter who portrays real models 
with gusto. Your pure aesthete  should only have a feeling for hemisphere s, curved lines and surfaces. But this 
"sentiment of the buttocks" is co mmon to all good painters. It is the lowest comm on measure of the whole 
profession. It is possible, like Mantegna, to have a passionate feeling for all that is solid, and at the same time to be 
a stoic philosopher and a hero-worshiper; possible, with Michelangelo, to have a complete re alization of breasts 
and also an interest in the soul or , like Rubens, to have a sentiment for human greatness as well as for human 
rumps. The greater includes the less; gr eat dramatic or reflective painters know everything that the aestheticians 
who paint geometrical pictures, apples or buttocks know, a nd a great deal more besides. What they have to say 
about formal relations, though important, is only a part of what they have to  express. The contemporary insistence 
on form to the exclusion of everything else is an absu rdity. So was the older insistence on exact imitation and

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

75
sentiment to the exclusion of form. There need be no exclusions. In spite  of the single name, there are many 
different kinds of painters and all of them, with the ex ception of those who cannot paint, and those whose minds 
are trivial, vulgar and tedious, have a right to exist. 
 All classifications and theories are made after the ev ent; the facts must first occur before they can be 
tabulated and methodized. Reversing the historical process, we attack th e facts forearmed with theoretical 
prejudice. Instead of considering each fact on its own merits, we ask how it fits  into the theoretical scheme. At any 
given moment a number of meritorious fact s fail to fit into the fa shionable theory and have to be ignored. Thus El 
Greco's art failed to conform with the ideal of good painting held by Philip the Second and his contemporaries. The 
Sienese primitives seemed to the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries incompetent barbarians. Under the influence 
of Ruskin, the later nineteenth century  contrived to dislike almost all arch itecture that was not Gothic. And the 
early twentieth century, under the influe nce of the French, deplores and ignor es, in painting, all that is literary, 
reflective or dramatic. 
 In every age theory has caused men to like much that was bad and reject much that was good. The only 
prejudice that the ideal art critic should have is against the incompet ent, the mentally dishonest and the futile. The 
number of ways in which good pictures can be painted is quite incalculable, depending only on the variability of 
the human mind. Every good painter invents a new way of painting. Is this man a competent painter? Has he 
something to say, is he genuine? These are the questions a critic must ask hims elf. Not, Does he conform with my 
theory of imitation, or distortion, or moral purity, or significant form? 
 There is one painter against whom, it seems to me, th eoretical prejudice has alwa ys most unfairly told. I 
mean the elder Breughel. Looking at his best paintings I find that  I can honestly answer in  the affirmative all the 
questions which a critic may legitimately put himself. He is highly competent aesthetica lly; he has plenty to say; 
his mind is curious, interesting and pow erful; and he has no false pretensions , is entirely honest. And yet he has 
never enjoyed the high reputation to which his merits entitle him. This is due, I think, to the fact that his work has 
never quite squared with any of  the various critical theories which since his days have had a vogue in the aesthetic 
world. 
 A subtle colorist, a sure and powerful draftsman, a nd possessing powers of composition that enable him to 
marshal the innumerable figures with which his pictures are filled into pleasingly decorative groups (built up, as we 
see, when we try to analyze his methods of formal arra ngement, out of individually flat, silhouette-like shapes 
standing in a succession of receding planes), Breughel can boast of purely aesthetic merits that ought to endear him 
even to the strictest sect of the Pharisees . Coated with this pure aesthetic jam, the bitter pill of his literature might 
easily, one would suppose, be swallowed. If Giotto's dallia nce with sacred history be forgiven him, why may not 
Breughel be excused for being an anthropologist and a social philosopher? To which I tentatively answer: Giotto is 
forgiven, because we have so utterly ceased to believe in Catholic Christianity that we can easily ignore the subject 
matter of his pictures and concentrate only on their formal qua lities; Breughel, on the ot her hand, is unforgivable 
because he made comments on humanity that are still inte resting to us. From his subject matter we cannot escape; 
it touches us too closely to be ignored. That is why Breughel is despised by all up-to-date Kunstforschers. 
 And even in the past, when there was no theoretical  objection to the mingling of  literature and painting, 
Breughel failed, for another reason, to ge t his due. He was considered low, gr oss, a mere comedian, and as such 
unworthy of serious consideration. Thus, the Encyclopedia Britannica, which in these matters may be safely relied 
on to give the current opinion of a couple of generati ons ago, informs us, in the eleven lines which it 
parsimoniously devotes to Peter Breughel that "the subjects of his pictures are chiefly humorous figures, like those 
of D. Teniers; and if he wants the delicate touch and silvery cl earness of that master, he has abundant spirit and 
comic power." 
 Whoever wrote these words -- and they might have b een written by any one desirous, fifty years ago, of 
playing for safety and saying the right thing -- can never have taken the trouble to l ook at any of the pictures 
painted by Breughel when he was a grown and accomplished artist. 
 In his youth, it is true, he  did a great deal of hack work for a de aler who specialized in caricatures and 
devils in the manner of Hieronymus Bosch. But his later pict ures, painted when he had r eally mastered the secrets 
of his art, are not comic at all. They are studies of peasant life, they are allegories, they are religious pictures of the 
most strangely reflective cast, they ar e exquisitely poetical landscapes. Breughel died at the height  of his powers. 
But there is enough of his mature work in existence -- at Antwerp, at Brussels, at Naples and above all at Vienna --

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

76
to expose the fatuity of the classical verdict and exhibit him for what he wa s: the first landscape painter of his 
century, the acutest student of manners, and the wonderfully skillf ul pictorial expounder or suggester of a view of 
life. It is at Vienna, indeed, that Breughel's art can be st be studied in all its as pects. For Vienna possesses 
practically all his best pictures of wh atever kind. The scattered pictures at Antwerp, Bru ssels, Paris, Naples and 
elsewhere give one but the faintest notion of Breughel's pow ers. In the Vienna galleries are collected more than a 
dozen of his pictures, all belonging to his last and best period. The Towe r of Babel, the great Calvary, the 
Numbering of the People at Bethlehem, the two Winter Landscapes and the Autumn Landscape, the Conversion of 
Saint Paul, the Battle between the Israelites and the Phi listines, the Marriage Feast and the Peasants' Dance -- all 
these admirable works are here. It is on these that he must be judged. 
 There are four landscapes at Vienna: the Dark Da y (January) and Huntsmen in the Snow (February), a 
November landscape (the Return of the Cattle), and the Numbering of the People at Bethlehem which in spite of its 
name is little more than a landscape with figures. This last, like the February Landscape and the Massacre of the 
Innocents at Brussels, is a study of s now. Snow scenes lent themselves par ticularly well to Breughel's style of 
painting. For a snowy background has the eff ect of making all dark or colored obj ects seen against it appear in the 
form of very distinct, sharp-edged silhouettes. Breughel doe s in all his compositions what the snow does in nature. 
All the objects in his pictures (which are composed in a manner that reminds one very much of the Japanese) are 
paper-thin silhouettes arranged, plane after plane, like the theatrical scenery in the depth of the stage. Consequently 
in the painting of snow scenes, where nature starts by imitating his habitual met hod, he achieves an almost 
disquieting degree of fundamental real ism. Those hunters stepping down over the brow of the hill toward the 
snowy valley with its frozen ponds are Jack Frost himself and his crew. Th e crowds who move about the white 
streets of Bethlehem have their being in an absolute winter, and those ferocious troopers looting and innocent-
hunting in the midst of a Christmas card landscape are a part of the very army of winter, and the innocents they kill 
are the young green shoots of the earth. 
 Breughel's method is less fundamentally compatib le with the snowless landscapes of January and 
November. The different planes stand ap art a little too flatly and distinctly . It needs a softer, bloomier kind of 
painting to recapture the intimate quality of such scenes as those he portrays in thes e two pictures. A born painter 
of Autumn, for example, would have fu sed the beasts, the men, the trees and the distant mountains into a hazier 
unity, melting all together, the near and the far, in the ri ch surface of his paint. Breughel painted too transparently 
and too flatly to be the perfect interp reter of such landscapes. Still, even in terms of his not entirely suitable 
convention he has done marvels. The Autu mn Day is a thing of the most exqui site beauty. Here, as in the more 
somberly dramatic January Landscape, he makes a subtle use of golds and yellows and browns, creating a sober yet 
luminous harmony of colors. The November Landscape is en tirely placid and serene; but in the Dark Day he has 
staged one of those natural dramas of the sky and earth -- a conflict between light and darkness. Light breaks from 
under clouds along the horizon, shines up from the river in the valley that lies in the middle distance, glitters on the 
peaks of the mountains. The foreground, wh ich represents the crest of a wooded hill, is dark ; and the leafless trees 
growing on the slopes are black agains t the sky. These two pictures are th e most beautiful sixteenth-century 
landscapes of which I have any knowledge. They are intens ely poetical, yet sober and not excessively picturesque 
or romantic. Those fearful crags and beetling precipices of  which the older painters were so fond do not appear in 
these examples of Breughel's maturest work. 
 Breughel's anthropology is as delightful as his nature  poetry. He knew his Flemings, knew them intimately, 
both in their prosperity and during the miserable years of strife, of rebellion, of persecution, of war and consequent 
poverty which followed the advent of the Reformation in Flanders. 
 A Fleming himself, and so profoundl y and ineradicably a Fleming that he was able to go to Italy, and, like 
his great countryman in the previous century, Roger van der Weyden, return without the faintest tincture of 
Italianism -- he was perfectly qualified to be the natural historian of the Flemish folk. He exhibits them mostly in 
those moments of orgiastic gaiety with which they te mper the laborious monotony of their daily lives: eating 
enormously, drinking, uncouthly dancing, indulging in that peculiarly Flemish scatological waggery. The Wedding 
Feast and the Peasants' Dance, both at Vienna, are superb examples of this anthropol ogical type of painting. Nor 
must we forget those two curious pictures, the Battle betw een Carnival and Lent and th e Children's Games. They 
too show us certain aspects of  the joyous side of Flemish life. But the view  is not of an individual scene, casually 
seized at its height and re produced. These two pictures ar e systematic and encyclopedic . In one he illustrates all

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

77
children's games; in the other all the amusements of carniva l, with all the forces arrayed on the side of asceticism. 
In the same way he represents, in hi s extraordinary Tower of Babel, all th e processes of building. These pictures 
are handbooks of their respective subjects. 
 Breughel's fondness for generalizing a nd systematizing is further illustra ted in his allegorical pieces. The 
Triumph of Death, at the Prado, is appa lling in its elaboration and completene ss. The fantastic "Dulle Griet" at 
Antwerp is an almost equally elaborate triumph of evil. His illustrations to proverbs and parables belong to the 
same class. They show him to have been a man profoundly convinced of the reality of evil and of the horrors which 
this mortal life, not to mention eter nity, hold in store for suffering humanity. The world is a horrible place; but in 
spite of this, or precisely because of this, men and wome n eat, drink and dance, Carnival tilts against Lent and 
triumphs, if only for a moment; children play in the streets, people get married in the midst of gross rejoicings. 
 But of all Breughel's pictures the on e most richly suggestive of reflection is not specifically  allegorical or 
systematic. Christ carrying the Cross is one of his larg est canvases, thronged with small figures rhythmically 
grouped against a wide and romantic background. The com position is simple, pleasing in itself, and seems to 
spring out of the subject instead of being imposed on it. So much for pure aesthetics. 
 Of the Crucifixion and the Carrying of the Cross there are hundreds of representations by the most 
admirable and diverse masters. But of all that I have ever  seen this Calvary of Breughel's is the most suggestive 
and, dramatically, the most appalling. For all other masters have painted these dreadful scenes from within, so to 
speak, outwards. For them Christ is the cen ter, the divine hero of the tragedy; th is is the fact from which they start; 
it affects and transforms all the other facts, justifying, in a sense, the ho rror of the drama and ranging all that 
surrounds the central figure in an orde red hierarchy of good and evil. Breughel, on the other hand, starts from the 
outside and works inwards. He represents the scene as it would have appeared to any casual spectator on the road 
to Golgotha on a certain spri ng morning in the year 33 A.D.  Other artists have pretended to be angels, painting the 
scene with a knowledge of its significance. But Breughel resolutely remains a human onlooker. What he shows is a 
crowd of people walking briskly in holiday joyfulness up the slopes of a hill. On the top of the hill, which is seen in 
the middle distance on the right, are two crosses with thieves fastened to them, and between them a little hole in the 
ground in which another cross is soon to be planted. Round the crosses, on the bare hill top stands a ring of people, 
who have come out with their picnic baskets to look on at the free entertainment offered by the ministers of justice. 
Those who have already taken their stand round the crosses are the prudent ones; in these days we should see them 
with camp stools and thermos flasks, six hours ahead of tim e, in the vanguard of the queue for a Melba night at 
Covent Garden. The less provident or more adventurous people are in the crowd coming up the hill with the third 
and greatest of the criminals whose cross is to take the place of honor between the other two. In their anxiety not to 
miss any of the fun on the way up, they forget that they will have to take back seats at the actual place of execution. 
But it may be, of course, that they have reserved their places, up there. At Tyburn one could get an excellent seat in 
a private box for half a crown; with the ticket in one's pocket, one could follow the cart all the way from the prison, 
arrive with the criminal and yet ha ve a perfect view of the performan ce. In these later days, when cranky 
humanitarianism has so far triumphed that hangings take  place in private and Mrs. Thompson's screams are not 
even allowed to be recorded  on the radio, we have to be content with  reading about executi ons, not with seeing 
them. The impresarios who sold seats at Tyburn have been replaced by title d newspaper proprietors who sell juicy 
descriptions of Tyburn to a prodigiously much larger public. If people were still hanged at Marble Arch, Lord 
Riddell would be much less rich.  
 That eager, tremulous, lascivious interest in blood and beastliness which in these more civilized days we 
can only satisfy at one remove from reality in the page s of our newspapers, was franklier indulged in Breughel's 
day; the naïve ingenuous brute in man was less sophisticat ed, was given longer rope, and joyously barks and wags 
its tail round the appointed victim. Seen thus, impassively, from the outside, the tragedy does not purge or uplift; it 
appalls and makes desperate; or it ma y even inspire a kind of gruesome mi rth. The same situation may often be 
either tragic or comic, according as it is seen through the eyes  of those who suffer or t hose who look on. (Shift the 
point of vision a little and Macbeth could be paraphrased as a roaring farce.) Breughel makes a concession to the 
high tragic convention by placing in  the foreground of his picture a li ttle group made up of the holy women 
weeping and wringing their hands. They stand quite ap art from the other figures in the picture and are 
fundamentally out of harmony with them, being painted in the style of Roger van der Weyden. A little oasis of 
passionate spirituality, an island of consciousness and comprehension in the midst of the pervading stupidity and

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

78
brutishness. Why Breughel put  them into his picture is difficult to  guess; perhaps for the benefit of the 
conventionally religious, perhaps out of  respect for tradition; or perhaps he found his own creation too depressing 
and added this noble irrelevance to reassure himself. 
(From Along the Road) 
 
 
 
Meditation on El Greco 
 
 The pleasures of ignorance are as great, in their wa y, as the pleasures of knowledge. For though the light is 
good, though it is satisfying to be able to place the things that surround one in the cat egories of an ordered and 
comprehensible system, it is also good to find oneself sometim es in the dark, it is pleasant now and then to have to 
speculate with vague bewilderment about a world, which ignorance has reduced to a quantity of mutually irrelevant 
happenings dotted, like so many unexplored  and fantastic islands, on the face of  a vast ocean of incomprehension. 
For me, one of the greatest charms of travel consists in the fa ct that it offers unique o pportunities for indulging in 
the luxury of ignorance. I am not one of those conscientious travelers who, be fore they visit a new country, spend 
weeks mugging up its geology, its economics, its art history, its literature. I prefer, at  any rate during my first few 
visits, to be a thoroughly unintelligent tourist. It is only later, when my ignorance has lost its virgin freshness, that I 
begin to read what the intelligent to urist would have known by heart before he bought his tickets. I read -- and 
forthwith, in a series of apocalypses, my isolated and mysteriously odd impre ssions begin to assu me significance, 
my jumbled memories fall harmoniously into patterns. The pleasures of ignorance have given place to the 
pleasures of knowledge. 
 I have only twice visited Spain -- no t often enough, that is to say, to have  grown tired of ignorance. I still 
enjoy bewilderedly knowing as little as possible about all I see between the Pyrenees a nd Cape Trafalgar. Another 
two or three visits, and the time will be ripe for me to go to the London Libr ary and look up "Spain" in the subject 
index. In one of the numerous, the all too numerous, books there catalogued I shall find, no doubt, the explanation 
of a little mystery that has mildly and intermittently puzzled me for quite a number of years -- ever since, at one of 
those admirable Loan Exhibitions in  Burlington House, I saw for the fi rst time a version of El Greco's Dream of 
Philip II. 
 This curious composition, familiar to every visitor to  the Escorial, represents the king, dressed and gloved 
like an undertaker in inky black, kneeling on a well-stu ffed cushion in the center foreground; beyond him, on the 
left, a crowd of pious kneelers, some lay, some clerical , but all manifestly saintly, are looking upwards into a 
heaven full of waltzing angels, cardinal virtues and biblical personages, grouped in a circle round the Cross and the 
luminous monogram of the Saviour. On the right a very la rge whale gigantically yawns, and a vast concourse, 
presumably of the damned, is hurrying (in spite of all that we learned in  childhood about the an atomy of whales) 
down its crimson throat. A curious pictur e, I repeat, and, as a work of art,  not remarkably goo d; there are many 
much better Grecos belonging even to the same youthful pe riod. Nevertheless, in spite of its mediocrity, it is a 
picture for which I have a special weakness. I like it for the now sadl y unorthodox reason that the subject interests 
me. And the subject interests me, because I do not know what  the subject is. For this dream of King Philip -- what 
was it? Was it a visionary an ticipation of the Last Judgment? A mystical peep into Heaven? An encouraging 
glimpse of the Almighty's short way with heretics? I do no t know -- do not at present even  desire to know. In the 
face of so extravagant a phantasy as this of Greco's, the pleasures of ignorance are pecu liarly intense. Confronted 
by the mysterious whale, the undertaker king, the swarming  aerial saints and scurryi ng sinners, I give my fancy 
license and fairly wallow in the pleasure of bewilderedly not knowing. 
 The fancy I like best of all that have occurred to me  is the one which affirms that this queer picture was 
painted as a prophetic and symbolic au tobiography, that it was meant to summarize hierog lyphically the whole of 
Greco's future development. For that whale in the right foreground -- that greatgrandfather of Moby Dick, with his 
huge yawn, his crimson gullet and the crowd of the damned  descending, like bank clerks at six o'clock into the 
Underground -- that whale, I say, is th e most significantly autobiographical objec t in all El Greco's early pictures. 
For whither are they bound, thos e hastening damned? "Down the red lane," as our nurses used to say when they 
were encouraging us to swallow the un eatable viands of childhood. Down the red lane into a dim inferno of tripes.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

79
Down, in a word, into that strange and rather frightful uni verse which Greco's spirit seems to have come more and 
more exclusively, as he grew older, to  inhabit. For in the Cretan's later pa inting every personage is a Jonah. Yes, 
every personage. Which is where The Dream of Philip II reveals itself as being imperfectly prophetic, a mutilated 
symbol. It is for the damned alone that the whale opens his mouth. If El Greco had wanted to tell the whole truth 
about his future development, he would have sent the blessed to join them, or at least ha ve provided his saints and 
angels with another monster of thei r own, a supernal whale floating head  downwards among the clouds, with a 
second red lane ascending, straight and narrow, toward a swallowed Heaven. Paradise and Purgatory, Hell, and 
even the common Earth -- for El Greco in his artistic maturity, every department of the universe was situated in the 
belly of a whale. His Annunciations and Assumptions, his Agonies and Tran sfigurations and Crucifixions, his 
Martyrdoms and Stigmatizations are all,  without exception, visceral events. H eaven is no larger than the Black 
Hole of Calcutta, and God Himself is whale-engulfed. 
 Critics have tried to explain El Greco's pictorial agorophobia in terms of his ea rly, Cretan education. There 
is no space in his pictures, they assure us, because the ty pical art of that Byzantium, which was El Greco's spiritual 
home, was the mosaic, and the mosaic is innocent of depth.  A specious explanation, whos e only defect is that it 
happens to be almost entirely beside the point. To begi n with, the Byzantine mosaic was not invariably without 
depth. Those extraordinary ei ghth-century mosaics in the Omeyyid mosque at Damascus, for example, are as 
spacious and airy as impressionist landscapes. They are, it is true, somewhat exceptional specimens of the art. But 
even the commoner shut-in mosaics have really nothing to do with El Greco's painting, for the Byzantine saints and 
kings are enclosed, or, to be more accurate, are flatly inla id in a kind of two-dimens ional abstraction -- in a pure 
Euclidean, plane-geometrical Heaven of gold or blue. Thei r universe never bears the smallest resemblance to that 
whale's belly in which every one of El Greco's persona ges has his or her mysteri ous and appalling being. El 
Greco's world is no Flatland; there is depth in it -- just a little depth. It is precisely this that makes it seem such a 
disquieting world. In their two-dimens ional abstraction the personages of the Byzantine mosaists are perfectly at 
home; they are adapted to their envir onment. But, solid and three-dimensiona l, made to be the inhabitants of a 
spacious universe, El Greco's people are shut up in a world where there is perhaps just room enough to swing a cat, 
but no more. They are in prison and, which makes it worse,  in a visceral prison. For all that surrounds them is 
organic, animal. Clouds, rock, drapery ha ve all been mysteriously transformed into mucus and skinned muscle and 
peritoneum. The Heaven into which Count Orgaz ascends is like some cosmic operation for appendicitis. The 
Madrid Resurrection is a resurrection in a digestive tube. And from the later pictures we receive the gruesome 
impression that all the personages, both human and divine , have begun to suffer a process of digestion, are being 
gradually assimilated to their viscer al surroundings. Even in the Madrid Resurrection the forms and texture of the 
naked flesh have assumed a strangely tripe-like aspect. In the case of the nudes in Laocoon and The Opening of the 
Seventh Seal (both of them works of El Greco's last years) this process of assimilation has been carried a good deal 
further. After seeing their draper ies and the surrounding landscape gradua lly peptonized and transformed, the 
unhappy Jonahs of Toledo discover, to th eir horror, that they themselves ar e being digested. Th eir bodies, their 
arms and legs, their faces, fingers, toes are ceasing to be humanly their own; they are becoming -- the process is 
slow but inexorably sure -- pa rt of the universal Whale's internal workings . It is lucky for them that El Greco died 
when he did. Twenty years more, and the Trinity, the Communion of Saints and all the human race would have 
found themselves reduced to hardly distinguishable excres cences on the surface of a co smic gut. The most favored 
might perhaps have aspired to be taenias and trematodes. 
 For myself, I am very sorry that El Greco did not live to be as old as Titian. At eighty or ninety he would 
have been producing an almost abstract art -- a cubism w ithout cubes, organic, purely visceral. What pictures he 
would then have painted! B eautiful, thrilling, profoundly appalling. For appa lling are even the pictures he painted 
in middle age, dreadful in spite of their extraordinary power and beauty. This swallowed universe into which he 
introduces us is one of the most disquieting creations of  the human mind. One of the most puzzling too. For what 
were El Greco's reasons for driving mankind down the re d lane? What induced him to take God out of His 
boundless Heaven and shut Him up in a fish's gut? One can on ly obscurely speculate. All that I am quite certain of 
is that there were profounder and more  important reasons for the whale than  the memory of the mosaics -- the 
wholly unvisceral mosaics -- which he may have seen in  the course of a Cretan childhood, a Venetian and Roman 
youth. Nor will a disease of the eye account, as some have claimed, for his strange artistic development. Diseases 
must be very grave indeed before they become completely coextensive with their victims. That men are affected by

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

80
their illnesses is obvious; but it is no less obvious that, except when they are almost in extremis, they are something 
more than the sum of their morbid symptoms. Dostoevs ky was not merely personified  epilepsy, Keats was other 
things besides a simple lump of pulmonary tuberculosis. Me n make use of their illnesses at least as much as they 
are made use of by them. It is likely enough that El Gr eco had something wrong with his eyes. But other people 
have had the same disease without for th at reason painting pictures like the Laocoon and The Opening of the 
Seventh Seal. To say that El Greco was just a defective eyesight is absurd; he  was a man who used a defective 
eyesight. 
 Used it for what purpose? to expres s what strange feeling about the wo rld, what mysterious philosophy? It 
is hard indeed to answer. For El Greco belongs as a metaphysician (every significant artist is a metaphysician, a 
propounder of beauty-truths and form -theories) to no known school. Th e most one can say, by way of 
classification, is that, like most of the great artists of the Baroque, he believed in the validity of ecstasy, of the non-
rational, "numinous" experien ces out of which, as a raw material, the reason fashions the gods or the various 
attributes of God. But the kind of ecs tatic experience artistically rendered and meditated on by El Greco was quite 
different from the kind of experience which is described and symbolically "rationalized" in the painting, sculpture 
and architecture of the great Baroque artists of the seicento. Those mass-producers of spirituality, the Jesuits, had 
perfected a simple technique for the fabrication of ort hodox ecstasies. They had cheapened an experience, hitherto 
accessible only to the spiritually we althy, and so placed it within the reach of all. Wh at the Italian seicento artists 
so brilliantly and copiously rendered was this cheapened experience and the metaphysic in terms of which it could 
be rationalized. "St. Teresa for All." "A John of the Cro ss in every Home." Such were , or might have been, their 
slogans. Was it to be wondered at if their sublimities were a trifle theatrical, their tenderness treacly, their spiritual 
intuitions rather commonplace  and vulgar? Even the greatest of the Baroque artists were not remarkable for 
subtlety and spiritual refinement. 
 With these rather facile ecstasies and the orthod ox Counter-Reformation theology in terms of which they 
could be interpreted, El Greco has nothing to do. The br ight reassuring Heaven, the smiling or lachrymose, but 
always all too human divinities, the stage immensities and stage mysteries, all the stock-in-trade of the seicentisti, 
are absent from his pictures. There is ecstasy and flamy as piration; but always ecstasy and aspiration, as we have 
seen, within the belly of a wh ale. El Greco seems to be talking all the time about the physiological root of ecstasy, 
not the spiritual flower; about the prim ary corporeal facts of numinous experien ce, not the mental derivatives from 
them. However vulgarly, the artists of the Baroque were  concerned with the flower, not the root, with the 
derivatives and theological interpretations, not the brute facts of immediate physical experience. Not that they were 
ignorant of the physiological nature of these primary facts. Bernini's astonishing St. Teresa proclaims it in the most 
unequivocal fashion; and it is interesting to note that in  this statue (as well as in the very similar and equally 
astonishing Ludovica Albertoni in San Franceso a Ripa) he gives to the draperies a kind of organic and, I might 
say, intestinal lusciousness of form. A little softened, smoot hed and simplified, the robe of the great mystic would 
be indistinguishable from the rest of the swallowed landsca pe inside El Greco's whale. Bernini saves the situation 
(from the Counter-Reformer's point of view) by introducing into his composition the figure of the dart-brandishing 
angel. This aerial young creature is the inhabitant of an unswallowed Heaven. He carries with him the implication 
of infinite spaces. Charmingly and a little preposterously  (the hand which holds the fiery dart has a delicately 
crook'd little finger, like the hand of some too refined you ng person in the act of rais ing her tea-cup), the angel 
symbolizes the spiritual flower of ecs tasy, whose physiological root is the sw ooning Teresa in her peritoneal robe. 
Bernini is, spiritually speaking, a plein-airiste. 
 Not so El Greco. So far as he is  concerned, there is nothi ng outside the whale. The primary physiological 
fact of religious experience is also, for him, the final f act. He remains consistently on the plane of that visceral 
consciousness which we so largely ignore, but with which ou r ancestors (as their language proves) did so much of 
their feeling and thinking. "Where is  thy zeal and thy strength, the soundi ng of the bowels and of thy mercies 
toward me?" "My heart is turned within me, my repentings  are kindled together." "I w ill bless the Lord who hath 
given me counsel; my reins also instruct  me in the night season." "For God is  my record, how greatly I long after 
you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ." "For Thou hast possessed my reins." "Is Ephraim my dear son?. . . Therefore 
my bowels are troubled for him." The Bible abounds in such phrases -- phrases which stri ke the modern reader as 
queer, a bit indelicate, even repellent. We are accustomed  to thinking of ourselves as thinking entirely with our 
heads. Wrongly, as the physiologists have shown. For what  we think and feel and ar e is to a great extent

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

81
determined by the state of our ductless gl ands and our viscera. The Psalmist drawing instruction from his reins, the 
Apostle with his yearning bowels, are thoroughly in the modern physiological movement. 
 El Greco lived at a time when the reality of the prim ary visceral consciousness was still recognized -- when 
the heart and the liver, the spleen and reins did all a man's feeling for him,  and the four humors of blood, phlegm, 
choler and melancholy determined hi s character and imposed his passing m oods. Even the loftiest experiences 
were admitted to be primarily physiological. Teresa knew God in terms of an exquisite pain in her heart, her side, 
her bowels. But while Teresa, and along with her the genera lity of human beings, found it natural to pass from the 
realm of physiology into that of the spirit -- from the belly of the whale out into the wide open sky -- El Greco 
obstinately insisted on remaining swallo wed. His meditations were all of re ligious experience and ecstasy -- but 
always of religious experien ce in its raw physiological state, always of  primary, immediate, visceral ecstasy. He 
expressed these meditations in terms of Christian symbols - -  o f  s y m b o l s ,  t h a t  i s  t o  say, habitually employed to 
describe experiences quite different from the primary physio logical states on which he was accustomed to dwell. It 
is the contrast between these symbols, with their curr ently accepted significance, and the special private use to 
which El Greco puts them -- it is this strange contrast which gives to El Greco's pictures their peculiarly disquieting 
quality. For the Christian symbols remind us of all the spiritu al open spaces -- the open spaces of altruistic feeling, 
the open spaces of abstract thought, the open spaces of fr ee-floating spiritual ecstasy. El Greco imprisons them, 
claps them up in a fish's gut. The sym bols of the spiritual open spaces are co mpelled by him to serve as a language 
in terms of which he talks about the cl ose immediacies of visceral awareness, about the ecstasy that annihilates the 
personal soul, not by dissolving it out into universal in finity, but by drawing it down and drowning it in the warm, 
pulsating, tremulous darkness of the body. 
 Well, I have wandered far and fancifully from the unde rtaker king and his enigma tic nightmare of whales 
and Jonahs. But imaginative wandering is the privilege of  the ignorant. When one doesn't know one is free to 
invent. I have seized the opportunity wh ile it presented itself. One of these da ys I may discover what the picture is 
about, and when that has happened I sh all no longer be at liber ty to impose my own interpretations. Imaginative 
criticism is essentially an art of ignorance. It is only because we don't know what a writer or artist meant to say that 
we are free to concoct meanings of our own. If El Greco had somewhere specifically told us what he meant to 
convey by painting in terms of Black Holes and mucus, I s hould not now be in a position to speculate. But luckily 
he never told us; I am justified in letting my fancy loose to wander. 
(From Music at Night) 
 
 
 
Form and Spirit in Art 
 
 A painter or a sculptor can be simultaneously represen tational and nonrepresentational. In their architectural 
backgrounds and, above all, in their draperies, many work s even of the Renaissance and the Baroque incorporate 
passages of almost unadulterated abstra ction. These are often expressive in the highest degree. Indeed, the whole 
tone of a representational work may be  established, and its inner meaning expr essed, by those parts of it which are 
most nearly abstract. Thus, the pictures of Piero della Francesca leave upon us an  impression of calm, of power, of 
intellectual objectivity and stoical detachment. From those of Cosimo Tura there emanates a sense of disquiet, even 
of anguish. When we analyze the pur ely pictorial reasons for our percep tion of a profound difference in the 
temperaments of the two artists, we find that a very impor tant part is played by the least representational elements 
in their pictures -- the draperies. In Piero's draperies there are large unbroken surfaces, and the folds are designed to 
emphasize the elementary solid-geometrical structure of the figures. In Tura's draperies the surfaces are broken up, 
and there is a profusion of sharp angles, of jagged and flame-like forms. Something analogous may be found in the 
work of two great painters of a later period, Poussin and Watteau. Watteau 's draperies are broken into innumerable 
tiny folds and wrinkles, so that the color of a mantle or a doublet is never the same for half an inch together. The 
impression left upon the spectator is one of extreme sensibility a nd the most delicate refi nement. Poussin's much 
broader treatment of these almost non-representati onal accessories seems to express a more masculine 
temperament and a philosophy of like akin to Piero's noble stoicism. 
 In some works the non-representational passages are actually more important than the representational.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

82
Thus, in many of Bernini's statues, only the hands, feet and face are fully repres entational; all the rest is drapery -- 
that is to say, a writhing and undulant abstraction. It is the same with El Greco's paintings. In some of them a third, 
a half, even as much as two thirds of  the entire surface is occupied by low- level organic abstra ctions, to which, 
because of their representational context, we give the name of draperies, or clouds, or rocks. These abstractions are 
powerfully expressive, and it is through them that, to a cons iderable extent, El Greco tells the private story that 
underlies the official subject matter of his paintings. 
 At this point the pure abstractioni st will come forward with a question. Seeing that the non-representational 
passages in representational works ar e so expressive, why should anyone bother with representation? Why trouble 
to tell a high-level story about rec ognizable objects when the more importa nt low-level story about the artist's 
temperament and reactions to life can be told in terms of pure abstractions? I myse lf have no objection to pure 
abstractions which, in the hands of a gifted artist, can  achieve their own kind of aes thetic perfection. But this 
perfection, it seems to me, is a perf ection without rather narrow limits. The Greeks called the circle "a perfect 
figure." And so it is -- one cannot improve on it. And yet a composition consisting of a red circle inscribed within a 
black square would strike us, for all its  perfection, as being a little dull. Even  aesthetically the perfect figure of a 
circle is less interesting than the perfect figure of a young woman. This does not mean, of course, that the 
representation of the young woman by a bad artist will be more valuable, as a picture, than a composition of 
circles, squares and triangles devise d by a good one. But it does mean, I think, th at Nature is a richer source of 
forms than any textbook of plane or solid geometry. Natu re has evolved innumerable forms and, as we ourselves 
move from point to point, we see large numbers of these forms, grouped in an endless variety of ways and thus 
creating an endless variety of new forms,  all of which may be used as the raw materials of works of art. What is 
given is incomparably richer than wh at we can invent. But the richness of Nature is, from our point of view, a 
chaos upon which we, as philosophers, men of science, techni cians and artists, must impose various kinds of unity. 
Now, I would say that, other things be ing equal, a work of ar t which imposes aesthetic unity upon a large number 
of formal and psychological elements is  a greater and more interesting work than one in which unity is imposed 
upon only a few elements. In other words, there is a hier archy of perfections. Bach's Two-Part Inventions are 
perfect in their way. But his Chromatic Fantasia is also perfect; and since its perfection involves the imposition of 
aesthetic unity upon a larger number of elements it is (as we all in fact  recognize) a greater work. The old 
distinction between the Fine Arts and the crafts is based to some ex tent upon snobbery and other non-aesthetic 
considerations. But not entirel y. In the hierarchy of perfections a perfect vase or a perfect carp et occupies a lower 
rank than that, say, of Giotto's frescoes at Padua, or Rembrandt's Polish Rider, or the Grande Jatte of Georges 
Seurat. In these and a hundred other ma sterpieces of painting the pictorial w hole embraces and unifies a repertory 
of forms much more numerous, varie d, strange and interesting than those which come together in the wholes 
organized by even the most gifted craftsmen. And, over and a bove this richer and subtler formal perfection, we are 
presented with the non-pictorial bonus of  a story and, explicit or implicit, a criticism of life. At their best, non-
representational compositions achieve perfection; but it is a perfection nearer to that of the jug or rug than to that of 
the enormously complex and yet completed unified masterpieces  of representational art -- most of which, as we 
have seen, contain expressive passages of almost pure abstraction. At the pres ent time it would seem that the most 
sensible and rewarding thing for a painter to do is (like Br aque, for example) to make the best and the most of both 
worlds, representational as well as non-representational. 
 Within his own Byzantine-Venetian tradition El Greco  did precisely this, comb ining representation with 
abstraction in a manner which we are accustomed to regard as characteristically modern. His intention was to use 
this powerful artistic instrument to express, in visual  terms, man's capacity for union with the divine. But the 
artistic means he employed were such that it was not possible for him to carry out that intention. The existence of a 
spiritual reality transcendent and yet immanent, absolutely other and yet the sustaining spiritual essence of every 
being, has frequently been rendered in visual symbols -- but not symbols of the kind employed by El Greco. The 
agitation of quasi-visceral fo rms in an overcrowded and almost spaceless world, from which non-human Nature 
has been banished, cannot, in the very nature of things, express man's union with the Spirit who must be worshiped 
in spirit. 
 Landscape and the human figure in re pose -- these are the sym bols through which, in the past, the spiritual 
life has been most clearly and powerfu lly expressed. "Be still and know that  I am God." Recollectedness is the 
indispensable means to the unitive knowledge of spiritua l reality; and though recollectedness should, and by some

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

83
actually can, be practiced in the midst of the most violen t physical activity, it is most effectively symbolized by a 
body in repose and a face that expresses an inner sere nity. The carved or painted Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of 
India and the Far East are perhaps the most perfect examples  of such visual symbols of the spiritual life. Hardly 
less adequate are the majestic Byzantine figures of Christ, th e Virgin and the saints. It seems strange that El Greco, 
who received his first training from Byzantine masters, should not have recognized the symbolical value of repose, 
but should have preferred to  represent or, through his accessory abst ractions, to imply, an agitation wholly 
incompatible with the spiritual life of which he had read in the pages of Dionysius. 
 No less strange is the fact that a disciple of Titian should have ignor ed landscape and that  a Neo-Platonist 
should have failed to perceive that, in the aged master's re ligious pictures, the only hint of spirituality was to be 
found, not in the all too human figures, but in the backgrounds  of Alpine foothills, peak s and skies. Civilized man 
spends most of his life in a cozy little universe of material artifacts, of social  conventions and of verbalized ideas. 
Only rarely, if he is the inhabitant of a well-ordered city, does he come into direct contact with the mystery of the 
non-human world, does he become aware of modes of bein g incommensurable with his own, of vast, indefinite 
extensions, of durations all but everlasting. From time immemorial deity has been associated with the 
boundlessness of earth and sky, with th e longevity of trees, rivers and mountains, with Leviathan and the 
whirlwind, with sunshine and the lilies of the field. Space and time on the cosmic scale are symbols of the infinity 
and eternity of Spirit. Non-human Natu re is the outward and visible expressi on of the mystery which confronts us 
when we look into the depths of our own being. The fi rst artists to concern themselves with the spiritual 
significance of Nature were the Taoist  landscape painters of China. "Cheri shing the Way, a virtuous man responds 
to objects. Clarifying his mind, a wise ma n appreciates forms. As to landscapes , they exist in material substance 
and soar into the realm of spirit. . . The virtuous man follows the Way by spir itual insight; the wise man takes the 
same approach. But the lovers of land scape are led into the Way by a sense of  form. . . The significance which is 
too subtle to be communicated by means of words of mouth may be gr asped by the mind through books and 
writings. Then how much more so in my case, when I have wandered among the rocks and hills and carefully 
observed them with my own eyes! I render form by form and appearance by appearance. . . The truth comprises the 
expression received through the eyes and recognized by the mind. If, in painting, theref ore, the likeness of an 
object is skillfully portrayed, both the eye and the mind will approve. When the eyes respond and the mind agrees 
with the objects, the divine spirit may be felt and truth may be attained in the pain ting." So wrote Tsung Ping who 
was a contemporary of St. Augustine, in an Introduction to Landscape Painting, which has become a Chinese 
classic. When, twelve hundred years later, European artis ts discovered landscape, they developed no philosophy to 
explain and justify what they were doing. That was left to  the poets -- to Wordsworth, to Shelley, to Whitman. The 
Presence which they found in Nature, "the  Spirit of each spot," is identical w ith Hsuan P'in, the mysterious Valley 
Spirit of the Tao Te Ching, who reveals herself to the landscape painter and, by him, is revealed to others in his 
pictures. But the lack of an explan atory philosophy did not prevent the best  of the European landscape painters 
from making manifest that 
 
 something far more deeply interfused,  
 Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,  
 And the round ocean, and the living air,  
 And the blue sky, and in the mind of man.  
 
"This is not drawing," Blake exclaimed, when he was shown one of Constable's sketches, "this is inspiration." And 
though Constable himself protested that it was only drawing, the fact remains that the best of his landscapes are 
powerful and convincing renderings of the spiritual reality in which all things  have their being. Indeed, they are 
much more adequate as symbols of spiritual life than the majority of the works in which Blake consciously tried to 
express his spiritualist philosophy. Much le ss gifted as painter than as poet, and brought up in a deplorable artistic 
tradition, Blake rarely produced a picture th at "comes off" to the extent of expr essing what he says so perfectly in 
his lyrics and in isol ated passages of the Prophetic Books. Constable, on the other hand, is a great Nature mystic 
without knowing or intending it. In this he reminds us of Seurat. "They see poetry in what I do," complained that 
consummate master of landscape. "No; I apply my method and that is all there is to it." But the method was applied 
by a painter who combined the most exquisite sensibility wi th intellectual powers of th e first order. Consequently 
what Seurat supposed to be merely pointillisme was in fact inspiration -- a vision of the world in which material

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

84
reality is the symbol and, one might say, the incarnation of an all-embracing spiritual reality. The famous method 
was the means whereby he told this Taoistic and Wordsworthian story; pointillisme, as he used it, permitted him to 
render empty space as no other painter has ever done, a nd to impose, through color, an unprecedented degree of 
unity upon his composition. In Seurat's paintings the near a nd the far are separate and yet are one. The emptiness 
which is the symbol of infinity is of the same substance as the finite forms it contains. The transient participates in 
the eternal, samsara and nirvana are one and the same. Such is the poetry w ith which, in spite of himself, Seurat 
filled those wonderful landscapes of H onfleur and Gravelines and the Seine. And such is the poetry which El 
Greco, in spite of what seems to have been a conscious de sire to imply it, was forced by the nature of his artistic 
instrument to exclude from every pict ure he painted. His peculiar treatment of space and form tells a story of 
obscure happenings in the subconscious mind -- of some haunting fear of wide vistas and the open air, some dream 
of security in the imagined equivalent of a womb. The conscious aspiration toward union with, and perfect freedom 
in, the divine Spirit is overridden by a subconscious longing for the consolations of some ineffable uterine state. 
 When we think of it in relation to the great world of human experience, El Greco's universe of swallowed 
spirit and visceral rapture seems curiously oppressive and disquieting. But considered as an isolated artistic system, 
how strong and coherent it seems, how  perfectly unified, how fascinatingly beautiful. And because of this inner 
harmony and coherence, it asserts in one way all that it ha d denied in another. El Greco's conscious purpose was to 
affirm man's capacity for union with the divine. Unconsci ously, by his choice of forms and his peculiar treatment 
of space, he proclaimed the triumph of the organic and the incapacity of spirit, so far as he personally was 
concerned, to transfigure the matter with which it is associ ated. But at the same time he was a painter of genius. 
Out of the visceral forms and cramped spaces, imposed  upon him by a part of his being beyond his voluntary 
control, he was able to create a ne w kind of order and perfection and, through this order and perfection, to reaffirm 
the possibility of man's union with the Spirit -- a possibility which the raw mate rials of his pictures had seemed to 
rule out. 
 There is no question here of a dialectical process of thesis, antithesis and synthesis. A work of art is not a 
becoming, but a multiple being. It exis ts and has significance on several leve ls at once. In most cases these 
significances are of the same kind and harmoniously reinfo rce one another. Not always , however. Occasionally it 
happens that each of the meanings is logically exclus ive of all the rest. There is then a happy marriage of 
incompatibles, a perfect fusion of cont radictions. It is one of those states  which, though inconceivable, actually 
occur. Such things cannot be; and yet, when you enter the Prado, when you visit Toledo, there they actually are. 
(From "Variations on El Greco," Themes and Variations) 
 
 
 
Variations on Goya 
 
 There are anthologies of almost everything -- from the be st to the worst, from the historically significant to 
the eccentric, from the childish to the s ublime. But there is one anthology, poten tially the most interesting of them 
all, which, to the best of my knowledge, has never yet been compiled; I mean, the Anthology of Later Works. 
 To qualify for inclusion in such an anthology, the artist  would have to pass several tests. First of all, he 
must have avoided a premature extinction and lived on into artistic and chronological maturity. Thus the last poems 
of Shelley, the last compositions of Schubert and ev en of Mozart would find no place in our collection. 
Consummate artists as they were, these men were still psychologically youthful when they died. For their full 
development they needed more time than their earthly des tiny allowed them. Of a differe nt order are those strange 
beings whose chronological age is out of all proportion to th eir maturity, not only as artis ts, but as human spirits. 
Thus, some of the letters written by K eats in his early twenties and many of the paintings which Seurat executed 
before his death at thirty-two might cer tainly qualify as Later Works. But, as a general rule, a certain minimum of 
time is needed for the ripening of such fruits. For the most part, our hypothetical anthologist will make his 
selections from the art of elderly and middle-aged men and women. 
 But by no means all middle-aged and elderly artists ar e capable of producing sign ificant Later Works. For 
the last half century of a long life,  Wordsworth preserved an almost unbr oken record of dullness. And in this 
respect he does not stand alone. There are many, many others whose Later Works are their worst. All these must be

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

85
excluded from our anthology, and I would pass a similar judg ment on that other large class of Later Works which, 
though up to the standard of the earlier, are not significantly  different from them. Haydn lived to a ripe old age and 
his right hand never forgot its cunning; but it also failed to learn a new cunning. Peter Pan-like, he continued, as an 
old man, to write the same sort of thing he had written twenty, thirty and forty years before. Where there is nothing 
to distinguish the creations of a man's maturity from those of his youth it is  superfluous to include any of them in a 
selection of characteristically Later Works. 
 This leaves us, then, with the Later Works of those artists who have lived without  ever ceasing to learn of 
life. The field is relatively narrow; but within it, what astonishing and sometimes what  disquieting treasures! One 
thinks of the ineffable serenity of  the slow movement of Beethoven's A-Minor Quartet, the peace passing all 
understanding of the orch estral prelude to the Benedictus of his Missa Solemnis. But this is not the old man's only 
mood; when he turns from the contem plation of eternal realit y to a consideration of the human world, we are 
treated to the positively terrifying merri ment of the last movement of his B-Flat-Major Quartet -- merriment quite 
inhuman, peals of violent and yet so mehow abstract laughter echoing down from somewhere beyond the limits of 
the world. Of the same nature, but if possible even more disquieting, is the mirth whic h reverberates through the 
last act of Verdi's Falstaff, culminating in that extraordinary final chorus in which the aged genius makes his 
maturest comment on the world -- not with bitterness or sarc asm or satire, but in a huge , contrapuntal paroxysm of 
detached and already posthumous laughter. 
 Turning to the other arts, we find something of the same non-human, posthumou s quality in the Later 
Works of Yeats and, coupled with a pr odigious majesty, in those of Piero della Francesca. And then, of course 
there is The Tempest -- a work charged with something of the unearthly serenity of Beethoven's Benedictus but 
concluding in the most disappointing anti-climax, with Prospero giving up his magic for the sake (heaven help us!) 
of becoming once again a duke. And the same sort of all too human anti-climax saddens us at the end of the second 
part of Faust, with its implication that draining  fens is Man's Final End, and th at the achievement of this end 
automatically qualifies the drainer for the beatific vision. 
 And what about the last El Grecos -- for example, that unimaginable Immaculate Conception at Toledo 
with its fantastic harmony of brilliant, ic e-cold colors, its ecstatic gesticulations in a heaven with a third dimension 
no greater than that of a mine-shaft, its deliquescence of flesh and flowers and drapery into a set of ectoplasmic 
abstractions? What about them, indeed? All we know is that, beautiful and supremely enigmatic, they will certainly 
take their place in our hypothetical anthology. 
 And finally, among these and all other extraordinary La ter Works, we should have to number the paintings, 
drawings and etchings of Goya's final twenty-five or thirty years. 
 The difference between the young Goya and the old may be best studied and appr eciated by starting in the 
basement of the Prado, where his cart oons for the tapestries are hung; climbing thence to the main floor, where 
there is a room full of his portraits of royal imbeciles, grandees, enchanting duchesses, majas, clothed and 
unclothed; walking thence to the sma ller room containing the two great pa intings of the S econd of May -- 
Napoleon's Mamelukes cutting down the crowd and, at night, when the revolt has been quelled, the firing squads at 
work upon their victims by the light of lanterns; and finally  mounting to the top floor wh ere hang the etchings and 
drawings, together with thos e unutterably mysterious and disturbing "bl ack paintings," with which the deaf and 
aging Goya elected to adorn the dining room of his house, the Quinta del So rdo. It is a progress from lighthearted 
eighteenth-century art, hardly at all unconventional in subject matter or in ha ndling, through fashionable brilliancy 
and increasing virtuosity, to something quite timeless bot h in technique and spirit -- the most powerful of 
commentaries on human crime and madness, made in terms of an artistic convention uniquely fitted to express 
precisely that extraordinary mingling of hatred and compassion, despair and sardonic humor, realism and fantasy. 
 "I show you sorrow," said the Buddha, "and the ending of sorrow" -- the sorrow of the phenomenal world in 
which man, "like an angry ape, plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven as make the angels weep," and the 
ending of sorrow in the beatific vision, the unitive contempla tion of transcendental reality. Apart from the fact that 
he is a great and, one might  say, uniquely original artist,  Goya is significant as be ing, in his Later Works, the 
almost perfect type of the man who knows only sorrow and not the ending of sorrow. 
 In spite of his virulent anti-cl ericalism, Goya contrived to rema in on sufficiently good terms with the 
Church to receive periodical commissions to paint religious pictures. Some of these, like the frescoes in the cupola 
of La Florida, are frankly and avowedly secular. But othe rs are serious essays in re ligious painting. It is worth

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

86
looking rather closely at what is probably the best of these religious  pieces -- the fine Agony in the Garden. With 
outstretched arms, Christ raises toward the comforting ange l a face whose expression is identical with that of the 
poor creatures whom we see, in a number of unforgettably  painful etchings and painti ngs, kneeling or standing in 
an excruciating anticipation before the gun barrels of a Fren ch firing squad. There is no tr ace here of that loving 
confidence which, even in the darkes t hours, fills the hearts of men a nd women who live continually in the 
presence of God; not so much as a hint of what Francois de Sales calls  "holy indifference"  to suffering and good 
fortune, of the fundamental equanimity, the peace pass ing all understanding, which belongs to those whose 
attention is firmly fixed upon a transcendental reality. 
 For Goya the transcendental reality did not exist. There is no evidence in his biography or his works that he 
ever had even the most distant pers onal experience of it. The only reality he knew was that of the world around 
him; and the longer he lived the more frightful did that worl d seem -- the more frightful, that is to say, in the eyes 
of his rational self; for his animal high spirits went on bubbling up irrepressibly, whenever his body was free from 
pain or sickness, to the very end. As a young man in good health, with money and reputation, a fine position and as 
many women as he wanted, he had found the world a very agreeable place -- absurd, of course, and with enough of 
folly and roguery to furnish subject matter for innumerabl e satirical drawings, but emin ently worth living in. Then 
all of a sudden came deafness, and, after the joyful dawn  of the Revolution, Napoleon and French imperialism and 
the atrocities of war; and, when Napoleon's hordes were gone, the unspeakable Ferdinand VII and clerical reaction 
and the spectacle of Spaniards fighting among themselv es; and all the time, like  the drone of a bagpipe 
accompanying the louder noises of what is officially calle d history, the enormous stupidity of average men and 
women, the chronic squalor of their superstitions, the bestiality of their occasional violences and orgies. 
 Realistically or in fantastic allegorie s, with a technical mastery that only  increased as he grew older, Goya 
recorded it all -- not on ly the agonies endured by his people at the hand s of the invaders, but also the follies and 
crimes committed by these same people in their dealings with one another. The great canvases of the Madrid 
massacres and executions, the incomparable etchings of War's Disasters, fill us with an indignant compassion. But 
then we turn to the Disparates and the Pinturas Negras. In these, with a sublimely impartial savagery, Goya sets 
down exactly what he thinks of the martyrs of the Do s de Mayo when they are no t being martyred. Here, for 
example, are two men -- two Spaniards -- sinking slow ly toward death in an engulfing quicksand, but busily 
engaged in knocking one another over the head with bl udgeons. And here is a rabble coming home from a 
pilgrimage -- scores of low faces, distorted as though by reflection in the back of a spoon, all open-mouthed and 
yelling. And all the blank black eyes stare vacantly and idiotically in different directions. 
 These creatures who haunt Goya's Later Works are in expressibly horrible, with the horror of mindlessness 
and animality and spiritual darkness. And above the lower depths where they obscenely pullulate is a world of bad 
priests and lustful friars, of fascina ting women whose love is a "dream of lies and inconstancy," of fatuous nobles 
and, at the top of the social pyramid, a royal family of half -wits, sadists, Messalinas and perjurers. The moral of it 
all is summed up in the central plate of the Caprichos, in which we see Goya hims elf, his head on his arms, 
sprawled across his desk and fitfully sleeping, while the air above is peopled with the bats and owls of necromancy 
and just behind his chair lies an enormous  witch's cat, malevolent as only Goya's  cats can be, staring at the sleeper 
with baleful eyes. On the side of the desk are traced th e words, "The dream of reason produces monsters." It is a 
caption that admits of more than one interpretation. When  reason sleeps, the absurd and loathsome creatures of 
superstition wake and are activ e, goading their vict im to an ignoble frenzy. But this  is not all. Reason may also 
dream without sleeping, may intoxicate itself, as it di d during the French Revoluti on, with the daydreams of 
inevitable progress, of liberty, equality and fraternity imposed by violence, of human self-sufficiency and the 
ending of sorrow, not by the all too arduous method which alone offers any prospect of success, but by political 
rearrangements and a better technology. The Caprichos were published in the last year of the eighteenth century; in 
1808 Goya and all Spain were given th e opportunity of discovering the consequences of such daydreaming. Murat 
marched his troops into Madrid; the Desastres de la Guerra were about to begin. 
 Goya produced four main sets of etchings -- the Caprichos, the Desastres de la Guerra, the Tauromaquia 
and the Disparates or Proverbios. All of them are Later Works. The Caprichos were not published until he was 
fifty-three; the plates of the Desastres were etched between the ages of sixty-five and seventy-five; the 
Tauromaquia series first saw the light when he was sixty-nine (a nd at the age of almost eighty he learnt the brand-
new technique of lithography in  order to be able to  do justice to his beloved bulls  in yet another medium); the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

87
Disparates were finished when he was seventy-three.  For the non-Spaniard the plates of the Tauromaquia series 
will probably seem the least interesting of Goya's etchings. They are brilliant records of the exploits of the bull 
ring; but unfortunately, or fo rtunately, most of us know ve ry little abou t bullfighting. Consequently, we miss the 
finer shades of the significance of these little masterpi ces of documentary art. More over, being documentary, the 
etchings of the Tauromaquia do not lend themselves to being executed with  that splendid audacity, that dramatic 
breadth of treatment, which delights us in the later paintings and the etchings  of the other three series. True, we 
find in this collection a few plates that  are as fine as anything Goya ever produced -- for example, that wonderful 
etching of the bull which has broken out of the arena and stands triumphant, a corpse hanging limp across its horns, 
among the spectators' benches. Bu t by and large it is not to the Tauromaquia that we turn for the very best 
specimens of Goya's work in black and white, or for the most characteristic expressions of his mature personality. 
The nature of the subject matter makes it impossible for him, in these plates to reveal himself fully either as a man 
or as an artist. 
 Of the three other sets  of etchings two, the Caprichos and Disparates, are fantastic and allegorical in 
subject matter, while the third, the Desastres, though for the most part it repres ents real happenings under the 
Napoleonic terror, represents them in a way which, bei ng generalized and symbolical rather than directly 
documentary, permits of, and indeed demands, a treatment no less broad and dramatic than is given to the fantasies 
of the other collections. 
 War always weakens and often completely shatters  the crust of customary decency which constitutes a 
civilization. It is a thin crust at the best of times, and beneat h it lies -- what? Look through Goya's Desastres and 
find out. The abyss of bestiality and di abolism and suffering seems almost botto mless. There is practically nothing 
of which human beings are not capable when war or re volution or anarchy gives th em the necessary opportunity 
and excuse; and to their pain death alone imposes a limit. 
 Goya's record of disaster has a number of recu rrent themes. There are those shadowy archways, for 
example, more sinister than  those even of Piranesi's Prisons, where women are violated, captives squat in a 
hopeless stupor, corpses lie rotting, emaciated children starve to death. Then there are th e vague street corners at 
which the famine-stricken hold out thei r hands; but the whiskered French hussa rs and carabiniers look on without 
pity, and even the rich Spaniards pass by indifferently, as  though they were "of another lineage." Of still more 
frequent occurrence in the series are the crests of those naked hillocks on which lie the dead, like so much garbage. 
Or else, in dramatic silhouette against the sky above t hose same hilltops, we see the hideous butchery of Spanish 
men and women, and the no less hideous vengeance meted out  by infuriated Spaniards upon their tormentors. 
Often the hillock sprouts a single tree, always low, some times maimed by gunfire. Upon its branches are impaled, 
like the beetles and caterpillars in a butcher bird's larder, whole naked torsos, sometimes decapitated, sometimes 
without arms, or else a pair  of amputated legs, or a se vered head -- warnings, set there by the conquerors, of the 
fate awaiting those who dare oppose the Emperor. At other times the tree is used as a gallows -- a less efficient 
gallows, indeed, than that majestic oak which, in Callot's Misères de la Guerre, is fruited with more than a score of 
swinging corpses, but good enough for a couple of executions en passant, except, of course, in the case recorded in 
one of Goya's most hair-raising plates, in which the tree  is too stumpy to permit of a man's hanging clear of the 
ground. But the rope is fixed, none the less, and to tighten the noose around their victim's neck, two French soldiers 
tug at the legs, while with his foot a third man thrusts with all his strength against the shoulders. 
 And so the record proceeds, horror after horror, unalleviated by any of the splendors which other painters 
have been able to discover in war; for, significantly, Goya never illustrates an engagement, never shows us 
impressive masses of troops marching in column or deployed in the order of battle. His concern is exclusively with 
war as it affects the civilian population, w ith armies disintegrated into individua l thieves and ravishers, tormentors 
and executioners -- and occasionally, when the guerilleros have won a skirmish, into individual victims tortured in 
their turn and savagely done to death by the avengers of their own earlier atrocities. All he shows us is war's 
disasters and squalors, without any of the glory or even picturesqueness. 
 In the two remaining series of etchings we pass from tragedy to satire and from historical fact to allegory 
and pictorial metaphor and pure fant asy. Twenty years separate the Caprichos from the Disparates, and the later 
collection is at once more somber and more enigma tic than the earlier. Much of the satire of the Caprichos is 
merely Goya's sharper version of what may be called sta ndard eighteenth-century humor. A plate such as Hasta la 
Muerte, showing the old hag before her mirror, coquettishl y trying on a new headdress, is just Rowlandson-with-a-

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

88
difference. But in certain other etchi ngs a stranger and more disquieting not e is struck. Goya's handling of his 
material is such that standard eight eenth-century humor often undergoes a se a-change into something darker and 
queerer, something that goes below the anecdotal surface of life into what lies beneath -- the unplumbed depths of 
original sin and original stupidity. And in the second half of the series the subject matter reinforces the effect of the 
powerful and dramatically sinister treatment; for here the th eme of almost all the plates is basely supernatural. We 
are in a world of demons, witches and familiars, half horri ble, half comic, but wholly disquieting inasmuch as it 
reveals the sort of thing that goes on in the squalid catacombs of the human mind. 
 In the Disparates the satire is on the whole less direct than in the Caprichos, the allegories are more general 
and more mysterious. Consider, for example, the technically astonishing plate, which shows a large family of three 
generations perched like huddling birds along a huge dead branch that projects into the utter vacancy of a dark sky. 
Obviously, much more is meant than meets the eye. Bu t what? The question is one upon which the commentators 
have spent a great deal of ingenuity -- spent it, one may suspect, in vain. For the satire, it would seem, is not 
directed against this particular social evil or that political mistake, but rath er against unregenerate human nature as 
such. It is a statement, in the form of an image, about life  in general. Literature and th e scriptures of all the great 
religions abound in such brief metaphorical verdicts on human destiny. Man turns the wheel of sorrow, burns in the 
fire of craving, travels through a vale of tears, lead s a life that is no better than a tale told by an idiot signifying 
nothing. 
 
 Poor man, what art? A tennis ball of error,  
 A ship of glass tossed in a sea of terror:  
 Issuing in blood and sorrow from the womb,  
 Crawling in tears and mourning to the tomb.  
 How slippery are thy paths, how sure thy fall!  
 How art thou nothing, when thou art most of all! 
 
 And so on. Good, bad and indifferent , the quotations could be multip lied almost indefinitely. In the 
language of the plastic arts, Goya has added a score of memorable contributions  to the stock of humanity's gnomic 
wisdom. 
 The Disparates of the dead branch is relatively easy to understand. So is th e comment on Fear contained in 
the plate which shows soldiers running in  terror from a gigantic cowled figure,  spectral against a jet black sky. So 
is the etching of the ecstatically smiling woman riding a stallion that turns its head and, seizing her skirts between 
its teeth, tries to drag her from her seat. The allegorical use of the horse, as a symbol of the senses and the passions, 
and of the rational rider or charioteer who is at liberty to direct or be run away with, is at least as old as Plato. 
 But there are other plates in which the symbolism is  less clear, the allegorical significance far from obvious. 
That horse on a tightrope, for example, with a woman da ncing on its back; the men w ho fly with artificial wings 
against a sky of inky menace; the priests and the elep hant; the old man wandering among phantoms: what is the 
meaning of these things? And perhaps the answer to that question is th at they have no meaning in any ordinary 
sense of the word; that they refer to strictly private ev ents taking place on the obscurer  levels of their creator's 
mind. For us who look at them, it may be that their real point  and significance consist precisely in the fact that they 
image forth so vividly, and yet, of necessity, so da rkly and incomprehensibly, some at least of the unknown 
quantities that exist at the heart of every personality. 
 Goya once drew a picture of an ancient man tott ering along under the burden of years, but with the 
accompanying caption, "I'm still learning." That old man was himself. To the end of a long life, he went on 
learning. As a very young man he paints like the feeble eclectics who were his masters. Th e first signs of power 
and freshness and originality appear in the cartoons for the tapestries, of which the earliest were executed when he 
was thirty. As a portraitist, however, he achieves nothing of outstanding interest until he is almost forty. But by that 
time he really knows what he's after, and during the second forty years of his life he moves steadily forward toward 
the consummate technical achievements, in oils, of the Pinturas Negras, and, in etching, of the Desastres and the 
Disparates. Goya's is a stylistic growth aw ay from restraint and into freed om, away from timidity and into 
expressive boldness. 
 From the technical point of  view the most striking fact about almo st all Goya's succe ssful paintings and

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

89
etchings is that they are composed  i n  t e r m s  o f  o n e  o r  m o r e  c l e a r l y  delimited masses standing out from the 
background -- often indeed, silhouetted against the sky. When he atte mpts what may be called an "all-over" 
composition, the essay is rarely successful. For he la cks almost completely the power which Rubens so 
conspicuously possessed -- the power of filling the entire canvas with figures or details of landscape, and upon that 
plenum imposing a clear and yet exquisitely subtle three-dimensional order. Th e lack of this power is already 
conspicuous in the tapestry cartoons, of  which the best are invariably those in which Goya does his composing in 
terms of silhouetted masses and the worst those in which he attempts to organize a collection of figures distributed 
all over the canvas. And compare, from this point of vi ew, the two paintings of the Dos de Mayo -- the Mamelukes 
cutting down the crowd in the Puerta del Sol, and the firing squads at work in the suburbs, after dark. The first is an 
attempt to do what Rubens would have done with an almost excessive facility -- to impose a formally beautiful and 
dramatically significant orde r upon a crowd of human and animal figures covering the greater part of the canvas. 
The attempt is not successful, and in spite of its power and the beauty of its component parts, the picture as a whole 
is less satisfying as a composition, and for that reason less moving as a story, than is the companion piece, in which 
Goya arranges his figures in a series of sharply delim ited balancing groups, dramati cally contrasted with one 
another and the background. In this picture the artist is speaking his native language, and he is therefore able to 
express what he wants to say with the maximum force a nd clarity. This is not the cas e with the picture of the 
Mamelukes. Here, the formal language is not truly hi s own, and consequently his eloquence lacks the moving 
power it possesses when he lets himself go in the genuine Goyescan idiom. 
 Fortunately, in the etchings, Goya is very seldom temp ted to talk in anything else. Here he composes almost 
exclusively in terms of bold separate  masses, silhouetted in luminous gray s and whites against a darkness that 
ranges from stippled pepper-and-salt to intense black, or in blacks and heavily  shaded grays against the whiteness 
of virgin paper. Sometimes there is only one mass, sometim es several, balanced and c ontrasted. Hardly ever does 
he make the, for him, almost fatal mistake of trying to organize his material in an all-over composition. 
 With the Desastres and the Disparates his mastery of this, his predestined method of composition, 
becomes, one might say, absolute. It is not, of course, th e only method of composition. Indeed, the nature of this 
particular artistic idiom is such that there are probably ce rtain things that can never be expressed in it -- things 
which Rembrandt, for example, was able to  say in his supremely beautiful and subtle illustrations to the Bible. But 
within the field that he chose to cultivate -- that the idio syncrasies of his temperament and the quality of his artistic 
sensibilities compelled him to choose -- Goya remains incomparable. 
(From Themes and Variations; originally  
published in COMPLETE ETCHINGS OF GOYA.  
Used by permission of Crown Publishers, Inc.) 
 
 
 
Landscape Painting as a Vision-Inducing Art 
 
 Let us begin by asking a question. What landscapes -- or, more generally, what re presentations of natural 
objects -- are most transporting, most intrinsically vision inducing? In the light of my own experience and of what I 
have heard other people say abou t their reactions to works of art, I will risk an answer. Othe r things being equal 
(for nothing can make up for lack of talent), the most transporting landscapes  are, first, those which represent 
natural objects a very long way off, and, second, those which represent them at close range. 
 Distance lends enchantment to the view; but so doe s propinquity. A Sung painti ng of faraway mountains, 
clouds and torrents is transporting; but so are the closeups of tropical leaves  in the Douanier Rousseau's jungles. 
When I look at the Sung landscape, I am reminded of the crags, the boundless expanses of plain, the luminous 
skies and seas of that Other World which lies at the self-conscious mind's antipodes. And those disappearances into 
mist and cloud, those sudden emergences of some strange, in tensely definite form, a weathered rock, for example, 
an ancient pine tree twisted by years of struggle with the wind -- these too, are transporting. For they remind me, 
consciously or unconsciously, of the Other World's essential alienness and unaccountability. 
 It is the same with the close-up. I look at those leaves with their arch itecture of veins, their stripes and 
mottlings, I peer into the depths of interlacing greenery, an d something in me is reminded of those living patterns,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

90
so characteristic of the visionary world, of those endless births and proliferations of geometrical forms that turn 
into objects, of things that are forever being transmuted into other things. 
 This painted close-up of a jungle is what, in one of its aspects, the Othe r World is like, and so it transports 
me, it makes me see with eyes that transfigure a work of art into something else, something beyond art. 
 I remember -- very vividly, though it took place many y ears ago -- a conversation with Roger Fry. We were 
talking about Monet's "Water Lilies." They had no right, Roger kept insisti ng, to be so shockingly unorganized, so 
totally without a proper compositional skeleton. They were  all wrong, artistically speaking. And yet, he had to 
admit, and yet. . . And yet, as I should now say, they were transporting. An artist of astounding virtuosity had 
chosen to paint a close-up of  natural objects seen in th eir own context and without reference to merely human 
notions of what's what, or what ought to be what. Man, we  like to say, is the measure of all things. For Monet, on 
this occasion, water lilies were the measure of water lilies; and so he painted them. 
 The same non-human point of view must be adopted by any artist who tries to render the distant scene. 
How tiny, in the Chinese painting, ar e the travelers who make their way along the valley! How frail the bamboo 
hut on the slope above them! And all the rest of the vast la ndscape is emptiness and sile nce. This revelation of the 
wilderness, living its own life according to the laws of its  own being, transports the mind toward its antipodes; for 
primeval Nature bears a strange resemblance to that inne r world where no account is taken of our personal wishes 
or even of the enduring concerns of man in general. 
 Only the middle distance and what may be called th e remoter foreground are strictly human. When we look 
very near or very far, man either vanishes altogether or loses his primacy. The astronomer looks even further afield 
than the Sung painter and sees even less of human life. At the other end of  the scale the physicist, the chemist, the 
physiologist pursue the close-up -- the cellular close-up, the molecu lar, the atomic and sub-atomic. Of that which, 
at twenty feet, even at arm's length, looked and sounded like a human being no trace remains. 
 Something analogous happens to the myopic artist a nd the happy lover. In the nuptial embrace personality 
is melted down; the individual (it is the recurrent theme of  Lawrence's poems and novels) ceases to be himself and 
becomes a part of the vast impersonal universe. 
 And so it is with the artist who chooses to use his ey es at the near point. In his work humanity loses its 
importance, even disappears completely. Instead of men and women playing their fant astic tricks before high 
heaven, we are asked to consider the li lies, to meditate on the unearthly beau ty of "mere things," when isolated 
from their utilitarian context and rendere d as they are, in and for themselves. Alternatively, (or, at an earlier stage 
of artistic development, exclusively) the non-human world of the near point is  rendered in patterns. These patterns 
are abstracted for the most part from leaves and flowers -- the rose, the lotus, the acanthus, palm, papyrus -- and are 
elaborated, with recurrences and varia tions, into something transportingly remi niscent of the living geometries of 
the Other World. 
 Freer and more realistic treatments of Nature at the near point make their appearance at a relatively recent 
date -- but far earlier than those treatments of the distant scene, to wh ich alone (and mistakenly) we give the name 
of landscape painting. Rome, for example, had its close-up landscapes. The fresco of a garden, which once adorned 
a room in Livia's villa, is a magnificent example of this form of art. 
 For theological reasons, Islam had to be content, for the most part, with "arabesques" -- luxuriant and (as in 
visions) continually varying patterns, based upon natural objects seen at th e near point. But even in Islam the 
genuine close-up landscape was not unknown. Nothing can ex ceed in beauty and in vision-inducing power the 
mosaics of gardens and buildings in the great Omayyad mosque at Damascus. 
 In medieval Europe, despite the prevailing mania for turning every da tum into a concept, every immediate 
experience into a mere symbol of something in a book, r ealistic close-ups of foliage and flowers were fairly 
common. We find them carved on th e capitals of Gothic pillars, as in th e Chapter House of So uthwell Cathedral. 
We find them in paintings of the chase -- paintings whose subject was that ever-present fact of medieval life, the 
forest, seen as the hunter or the strayed traveler sees it, in all its bewildering intricacy of leafy detail. 
 The frescoes in the papal palace at Avignon are almost the sole survivors of what, even in the time of 
Chaucer, was a widely practiced form of secular art. A centur y later this art of the forest close-up came to its self-
conscious perfection in such magnificen t and magical works as Pisanello's "St. Hubert" and Paolo Uccello's "Hunt 
in a Wood," now in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford. Clos ely related to the wall pain tings of forest close-ups 
were the tapestries, with which the rich men of northern Europe adorne d their houses. The best of these are vision-

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

91
inducing works of the highest order. In their own way they are as heavenly, as powerfully reminiscent of what goes 
on at the mind's antipodes, as are the great masterpiece s of landscape painting at the farthest point -- Sung 
mountains in their enormous solitude, Ming rivers interm inably lovely, the blue sub-Alpine world of Titian's 
distances, the England of Constable; th e Italics of Turner and Corot; the Provences of Cézanne and Van Gogh; the 
Île de France of Sisley and the Île de France of Vuillard. 
 Vuillard, incidentally, was a supreme master both of  the transporting close-up and of the transporting 
distant view. His bourgeois interiors are masterpieces of vi sion-inducing art, compared with which the works of 
such conscious and so to say professional visionaries as Blake and Odilon Redon seem feeble in the extreme. . . 
 At the near point Vuillard painted interiors for th e most part, but sometimes also gardens. In a few 
compositions he managed to combine the magic of propi nquity with the magic of remoteness by representing a 
corner of a room in which there stands or hangs one of his own, or someone else's, representations of a distant view 
of trees, hills and sky. It is an invitation to make the best  of both worlds, the telescopic  and the microscopic, at a 
single glance. 
 For the rest, I can think of only a very few close- up landscapes by modern Euro pean artists. There is a 
strange "Thicket" by Van Gogh at the Me tropolitan. There is Constable's wonde rful "Dell in Helmington Park" at 
the Tate. There is a bad pict ure, Millais's "Ophelia," made magical, in spite of everything, by its intricacies of 
summer greenery seen from the point of view, very nearly , of a water rat. And I remember a Delacroix, glimpsed 
long ago at some loan exhibition, of ba rk and leaves and blossom at the clos est range. There must, of course, be 
others; but either I have forgotten, or have never seen them. In any case there is nothing in the West comparable to 
the Chinese and Japanese renderings of nature at the near  point. A spray of blossoming plum, eighteen inches of a 
bamboo stem with its leaves, tits or finches seen at hardly more than ar m's length among the bushes, all kinds of 
flowers and foliage, of birds and fish and small mammals. Each tiny life is represented as the center of its own 
universe, the purpose, in its own estimati on, for which this world and all that is in it were created; each issues its 
own specific and individual declara tion of independence from human imper ialism; each, by ironic implication, 
derides our absurd pretensions to la y down merely human rules for the conduct of the cosmic game; each mutely 
repeats the divine tautology: I am that I am. 
 Nature at the middle distance is familiar -- so familia r that we are deluded into believing that we really 
know what it is all about. Seen very close at hand, or at a great distance,  or from an odd angle, it seems 
disquietingly strange, wonderful beyond all comprehension. The closeup landsc apes of China and Japan are so 
many illustrations of the theme that samsara and nirvana are one, that the Absolute is manifest in every appearance. 
These great metaphysical, and yet pragmatic, truths were rende red by the Zen-inspired artists of the Far East in yet 
another way. All the objects of their near-point scrutiny were represented in a state of unrelatedness against a blank 
of virgin silk or paper. Thus isolat ed, these transient appearances take on a kind of absolute Thing-in-Itselfhood. 
Western artists have used this device  when painting sacred figures, portraits  and, sometimes, natural objects at a 
distance. Rembrandt's "Mill" and Van Gogh's "Cypresses" are examples of long-range landscapes in which a single 
feature has been absolutized by isolation. The magical power  of many of Goya's etchin gs, drawings and paintings 
can be accounted for by the fact that hi s compositions almost always take the fo rm of a few silhouettes, or even a 
single silhouette, seen agai nst a blank. These silhouetted shapes po ssess the visionary qu ality of intrinsic 
significance, heightened by isolation and unrelatedness to preter natural intensity. In nature, as in a work of art, the 
isolation of an object tends to invest it with absoluteness, to endow it with that more-than-symbolic meaning which 
is identical with being. 
 
 -- But there's a Tree -- of many, one, 
 A single Field which I have looked upon, 
 Both of them speak of something that is gone.  
 
The something which Wordsworth could no longer see was the "visionary gleam." That gleam, I remember, and 
that intrinsic significance were the properties of a solitar y oak that could be seen from the train, between Reading 
and Oxford, growing from the summit of a little knoll in a wide expanse of plowland, and silhouetted against the 
pale northern sky. 
 The effects of isolation combined with proximity ma y be studied, in all their magical strangeness, in an 
extraordinary painting by a seventeent h-century Japanese artist, who was al so a famous swordsman and a student

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

92
of Zen. It represents a butcherbird, perched on the very tip of a naked bran ch, "waiting without purpose, but in the 
state of highest tension." Beneath, a bove and all around is nothing.  The bird emerges from the Void, from that 
eternal namelessness and formlessness, which is yet the ve ry substance of the manifo ld, concrete and transient 
universe. That shrike on its bare branch is first cousin to  Hardy's wintry thrush. But whereas the thrush insists on 
teaching us some kind of a lesson, the Far Eastern butcherb ird is content simply to ex ist, to be intensely and 
absolutely there. 
(From Heaven and Hell) 
 
 
 
MUSIC 
 
 
 
Popular Music 
 
 There is a certain jovial , bouncing, hoppety little tune with which any one who has spent even a few weeks 
in Germany, or has been tended in childhood by a German nurse, must be very familiar. Its name is "Ach, du lieber 
Augustin." It is a merry little affair in  three-four time; in rhythm and melody so simple, that the village idiot could 
sing it after a first hearing; in sentiment so innocent th at the heart of the most susceptible maiden would not 
quicken by a beat a minute at the s ound of it. Rum ti-tiddle, Um tum tum, Um tum tum, Um tum tum: Rum ti-
tiddle, Um tum tum, Um tum tum, TU M. By the very frankness of its cheer ful imbecility the thing disarms all 
criticism. 
 Now for a piece of history. "Ach, du lieber Augustin" wa s composed in 1770, and it was the first waltz. The 
first waltz! I must ask the reader to hum the tune to himsel f, then to think of any modern waltz with which he may 
be familiar. He will find in the difference between the tunes a subject richly suggestive of interesting meditations. 
 The difference between "Ach, du lie ber Augustin" and any waltz tune co mposed at any date from the 
middle of the nineteenth century onwards, is the differe nce between one piece of music almost completely empty 
of emotional content and a nother, densely saturated with amorous sentiment, languor and voluptuousness. The 
susceptible maiden who, when she hears "Ach, du liebe r Augustin," feels no emotions  beyond a general sense of 
high spirits and cheerfulness, is fairly made to palpitate by the luscious strains of th e modern waltz. Her soul is 
carried swooning along, over waves of syrup; she seems to breathe an atmosphere heavy with ambergris and musk. 
From the jolly little thing it was at its birth, the waltz has grown into the voluptuous, heart-stirring affair with 
which we are now familiar. 
 And what has happened to the waltz has happened to all popular music. It was once innocent but is now 
provocative; once pellucid, now richly clotted; once elegant, now deliberat ely barbarous. Compare the music of 
The Beggar's Opera with the music of a contemporary revue. They differ as life in the garden of Eden differed 
from life in the artistic quarter of Gomorrah. The one is prelapsarian in its airy sweetness, the other is rich, luscious 
and loud with conscious savagery. 
 The evolution of popular music has run parallel on a lo wer plane, with the evolut ion of serious music. The 
writers of popular tunes are not musician s enough to be able to invent new form s of expression. A ll they do is to 
adapt the discoveries of origin al geniuses to the vul gar taste. Ultimately and indire ctly, Beethoven is responsible 
for all the languishing waltz tunes, all th e savage jazzings, for all that is ma udlin and violent in our popular music. 
He is responsible because it was he w ho first devised really effective musica l methods for the direct expression of 
emotion. Beethoven's emotions happened to be noble; moreove r, he was too intellectual a musician to neglect the 
formal, architectural side of music. But unhappily he made it possible for composers of inferior mind and character 
to express in music their less exalted passions a nd vulgarer emotions. He ma de possible the weakest 
sentimentalities of Schumann, the baroque  grandiosities of Wagner, the hysteri cs of Scriabine; he made possible 
the waltzes of all the Strausses, from the Blue Danube to the waltz from Salome. And he made possible, at a still 
further remove, such masterpieces of popular art as "Y ou made me love you" and "T hat coal black mammy of 
mine."

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

93
 For the introduction of a certain vi brant sexual quality into music, Beethoven is perhap s less directly 
responsible than the nineteen th-century Italians. I used often to wonde r why it was that Mozart's operas were less 
popular than those of Verdi, Leoncaval lo and Puccini. You couldn't ask for mo re, or more infectiously "catchy" 
tunes than are to be found in Figaro or Don Giovanni. The music though "classical, " is not obscure, nor 
forbiddingly complex. On the contrary  it is clear, simple with that seemingly easy simplicity which only 
consummate genius can achieve and t horoughly engaging. And yet for every time Don Giovanni is played, La 
Boheme is played a hundred. Tosca is at least fifty times as popular as Figaro. And if you look through a catalogue 
of gramophone records you will find that, while you can buy Rigoletto complete in thirty discs, there are not more 
than three records of The Magic Flute. This seems as first sight extremely puzzl ing. But the reason is not really far 
to seek. Since Mozart's day composers have learned the ar t of making music throatily and palpitatingly sexual. The 
arias of Mozart have a beautiful clea r purity which renders them utterly in sipid compared with the sobbing, catch-
in-the-throaty melodies of the nineteenth-century Italians. The public, having accustomed itself to this stronger and 
more turbid brewage, finds no flavor in the crystal songs of Mozart. 
 No essay on modern popular music would be complete  without some grateful reference to Rossini, who 
was, as far as I know, the first com poser to show what charms there are in vulgar melody. Melodies before 
Rossini's day were often exceedingly commonplace and cheap; but almost never do they possess that almost 
indefinable quality of low vulgarity wh ich adorns some of the most successful of Rossini's airs, and which we 
recognize as being somehow a moder n, contemporary quality. The methods which Rossini employed for the 
achievement of his melodic vulgarity are not easy to an alyze. His great secret, I fancy, was the very short and 
easily memorable phrase frequently repeated  in different parts of the scale. Bu t it is easiest to define by example. 
Think of Moses' first aria in Moses in Egypt. That is an essentially vulgar melody; and it is quite unlike the popular 
melodies of an earlier date. Its affinities are with the modern popular tune. It is to his invention of vulgar tunes that 
Rossini owed his enormous contemporar y success. Vulgar people before his day had to be content with Mozart's 
delicate airs. Rossini came and revealed to them a more congenial music. That  the world fell do wn and gratefully 
worshiped him is not surprising. If he has long ceased to be popular, that is because his successors, profiting by his 
lessons, have achieved in his own vulgar line triumphs of which he could not have dreamed. 
 Barbarism has entered popular music from two sour ces -- from the music of barbarous people, like the 
Negroes, and from serious music which has drawn upon ba rbarism for its inspirati on. The technique of being 
barbarous effectively has come, of course, from serious mu sic. In the elaboration of this technique no musicians 
have done more than the Russians. If Rimsky-Korsakoff had never lived, modern dan ce music would not be the 
thing it is. 
 Whether, having grown inured to such violent and purely physiological stimuli as the clashing and 
drumming, the rhythmic throbbing and wailing glissandos of modern jazz music can supply, the world will ever 
revert to something less crudely direct, is a matter a bout which one cannot prophesy. Even serious musicians seem 
to find it hard to dispense with barbarism. In spite of the monotony and the appalli ng lack of subtlety which 
characterize the process, they persis t in banging away in the old Russian manner, as though there were nothing 
more interesting or exciting to be thought of. When, as a boy, I first heard Russi an music, I was carried off my feet 
by its wild melodies, its persis tent, its relentlessly throbbi ng rhythms. But my exciteme nt grew less and less with 
every hearing. Today no music seems to me more tedious. The only musi c a civilized man can take unfailing 
pleasure in is civilized musi c. If you were compelled to listen every day of your life to a single piece of music, 
would you choose Stravinsky's "Oiseau de Feu" or Beethoven's "Grosse Fugue"? Obviously, you would choose the 
fugue, if only for its intricacy and because there is more in it to occupy the mind than in the Russian's too simple 
rhythms. Composers seem to forget th at we are, in spite of everything an d though appearances may be against us, 
tolerably civilized. They overwhelm us not merely with Russian and negr oid noises, but with Celtic caterwaulings 
on the black notes, with dismal Spanish wailings, punctuat ed by the rattle of the castanets and the clashing 
harmonies of the guitar. When serious composers have gone  back to civilized music -- and already some of them 
are turning from barbarism -- we shall probably hear a corresponding change for the more refined in popular 
music. But until serious musicians lead the way, it will be absurd to expect the vulgarizers to change their style. 
(From Along the Road)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

94
Music at Night 
 
 Moonless, this June night is all the more alive with stars. Its darkness is  perfumed with faint gusts from the 
blossoming lime trees, with the smell of wetted earth and the invisible greenness of the vines. There is silence; but 
a silence that breathes with the soft breathing of the sea and, in  the thin shrill noise of  a cricket, insistently, 
incessantly harps on the fact of its own deep perfection. Far aw ay, the passage of a trai n is like a long caress, 
moving gently, with an inexorable gentleness, across the warm living body of the night. 
 Music, you say; it would be  a good night for music. But I have musi c here in a box, shut up, like one of 
those bottled djinns in the Arabian Nights, and ready at a touch to break out of its prison. I make the necessary 
mechanical magic, and suddenly, by some  miraculously appropriate  coincidence (for I had selected the record in 
the dark, without knowing what music the machine would play), suddenly the introduction to the Benedictus in 
Beethoven's Missa Solemnis begins to trace its patterns on the moonless sky. 
 The Benedictus. Blessed and blessing, this music is in some sort the equivalent of the night, of the deep and 
living darkness, into which, now in a single jet, now in a fine interweaving of melodies, now in pulsing and almost 
solid clots of harmonious sound, it pours itself, stanchle ssly pours itself, like time, like the rising and falling, 
falling trajectories of a life. It is the equivalent of th e night in another mode of being, as an essence is the 
equivalent of the flowers, from which it is distilled. 
 There is, at least there sometimes seems to be, a certain blessedness lying at  the heart of things, a 
mysterious blessedness, of whose existe nce occasional accidents or providences (f or me, this night is one of them) 
make us obscurely, or it may be inte nsely, but always fleetingly, alas, always only for a few brief moments aware. 
In the Benedictus Beethoven gives expression to this awareness of blessedness. Hi s music is the equivalent of this 
Mediterranean night, or rather of the blessedness as it w ould be if it could be sifted clear of irrelevance and 
accident, refined and separated out into its quintessential purity. 
 "Benedictus, benedictus. . ." One after another the voices take up the theme propounded by the orchestra 
and lovingly mediated through a long and exquisite solo (for the blessedness reveals itself most often to the solitary 
spirit) by a single violin. "Benedictus, benedictus. . ." And then, suddenly, the music dies; the flying djinn has been 
rebottled. With a stupid insect-like insistence, a steel point rasps and rasps the silence. 
 
 At school, when they taught us what was technically known as English, they used to tell us to "express in 
our own words" some passage from whatever play of Sh akespeare was at the moment being rammed, with all its 
annotations -- particular ly the annotations -- down our  reluctant throats. So there we would sit, a row of inky 
urchins, laboriously translating "now silken dalliance in th e wardrobe lies" into "now smart silk clothes lie in the 
wardrobe," or "To be or not to be" into "I wonder whether I ought to commit suicide or not." When we had 
finished, we would hand in our papers , and the presiding pedagogue would give us marks, more or less, according 
to the accuracy with which "our own words" had "expressed" the meaning of the Bard. 
 He ought, of course, to have given us naught all round with a hundred lines to himself for ever having set us 
the silly exercise. Nobody's "own word s," except those of Shakespeare hims elf, can possibly "express" what 
Shakespeare meant. The substance of a work of art is inse parable from its form; its truth and its beauty are two and 
yet, mysteriously, one. The verbal expression of even a metaphys ic or a system of ethics is  very nearly as much of 
a work of art as a love poem. The philosophy of Plato expressed in the "own words" of Jowett is not the philosophy 
of Plato; nor in the "own words" of, say, Billy Sunday, is the teaching of St. Paul St. Paul's teaching. 
 "Our own words" are inadequate even to express th e meaning of other words; how much more inadequate, 
when it is a matter of rendering meanings which have their original expression in term s of music or one of the 
visual arts! What, for example, does music "say"? You can  buy at almost any concert an analytical program that 
will tell you exactly. Much too exactly; that is the troub le. Every analyst has his own version. Imagine Pharaoh's 
dream interpreted successively by Joseph, by the Egyptian soothsayers, by Freud, by Rivers, by Adler, by Jung, by 
Wohlgemuth: it would "say" a great many different things . Not nearly so many, howeve r, as the Fifth Symphony 
has been made to say in the verbiage of its analysts. Not nearly so many as the Virgin of the Rocks and the Sistine 
Madonna have no less lyrically said. 
 Annoyed by the verbiage and this absurd multiplicity of  attributed "meanings," some critics have protested 
that music and painting signify nothing but themselves; that the only things they "say" are things, for example,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

95
about modulations and fugues, about co lor values and three-dimensional form s. That they say anything about 
human destiny or the universe at large is a notion which these purists dismiss as merely nonsensical. 
 If the purists were right, then we should have to regard  painters and musicians as monsters. For it is strictly 
impossible to be a human being and not to have views of so me kind about the universe at large, very difficult to be 
a human being and not to express those views, at any rate  by implication. Now, it is a matter of observation that 
painters and musicians are not monsters. Therefore. . . The conclusion follows, unescapably. 
 It is not only in program music and problem pictures that composers and painters express their views about 
the universe. The purest and most abstra ct artistic creations can  be, in their own peculia r language, as eloquent in 
this respect as the most deliberately tendencious. 
 Compare, for example, a Virgin by Piero della Fr ancesca with a Virgin by Tura. Two Madonnas -- and the 
current symbolical conventions are obser ved by both artists. The difference, the enormous difference between the 
two pictures is a purely pictorial difference, a difference in the forms and their arrangement, in the disposition of 
the lines and planes and masses. To any one in the leas t sensitive to the eloquence of pure form, the two Madonnas 
say utterly different things about the world. 
 Piero's composition is a welding together of smooth a nd beautifully balanced solidities. Everything in his 
universe is endowed with a kind of supe rnatural substantiality, is much more "there" than  any object of the actual 
world could possibly be. And how sub limely rational, in the noblest, the most humane  acceptation of the word, 
how orderedly philosophical is the lands cape, are all the inhabitant s of this world! It is  the creation of a god who 
"ever plays the geometer." 
 What does she say, this Madonna fro m San Sepolcro? If I have not who lly mistranslated the eloquence of 
Piero's forms, she is telling us of the greatness of the hu man spirit, of its power to rise above circumstance and 
dominate fate. If you were to ask he r, "How shall I be saved?" "By Reas on," she would probably answer. And, 
anticipating Milton, "Not onl y, not mainly upon the Cross," she would say, "is Paradise  regained, but in those 
deserts of utter solitude where man puts forth the strength of his reason to resi st the Fiend." This particular mother 
of Christ is probably not a Christian. 
 Turn now to Tura's picture. It is fashioned out of a substance that is like the living embodiment of flame -- 
flame-flesh, alive and sensitive and suffering. His surf aces writhe away from the eye, as though shrinking, as 
though in pain. The lines flow intricately with somethi ng of that disquieting and, you feel, magical calligraphy, 
which characterizes certain Tibetan pa intings. Look closely; feel your way in to the picture, into the painter's 
thoughts and intuitions and emotions. This man was naked and at the mercy of destiny. To be able to proclaim the 
spirit's stoical independence, you must be able to raise you r head above the flux of things; this man was sunk in it, 
overwhelmed. He could introduce no orde r into his world; it remained for hi m a mysterious chaos, fantastically 
marbled with patches, now of purest heaven, now of the mo st excruciating hell. A beautiful and terrifying world, is 
this Madonna's verdict; a world like the incarnation, th e material projection, of O phelia's madness. There are no 
certainties in it but suffering and occasional happiness. And as for salvation, who knows the way of salvation? 
There may perhaps be miracles, and there is always hope. 
 The limits of criticism are very quickly reached. When he  has said "in his own words" as much, or rather as 
little, as "own words" can say, the cri tic can only refer his readers to the original work of art: let them go and see 
for themselves. Those who overstep the limit are either rath er stupid, vain people, who love their "own words" and 
imagine that they can say in th em more than "own words" are able in the na ture of things to express. Or else they 
are intelligent people who happen to be  philosophers or literary  artists and who find it convenient to make the 
criticism of other men's work a jumping-off place for their own creativity. 
 What is true of painting is equall y true of music. Music "says" things  about the world, but in specifically 
musical terms. Any attempt to reproduce these musical st atements "in our own words"  is necessarily doomed to 
failure. We cannot isolate the truth contained in a piece of music; for it is a beauty-truth and inseparable from its 
partner. The best we can do is to in dicate in the most general terms the na ture of the musica l beauty-truth under 
consideration and to refer curious truth-seekers to the original. Thus, the introduction to the Benedictus in the 
Missa Solemnis is a statement about the blessedness that is at the heart of  things. But this is about as far as "own 
words" will take us. If we were to start describing in  our "own words" exactly what Beethoven felt about this 
blessedness, how he conceived it, what he thought its na ture to be, we should very soon find ourselves writing 
lyrical nonsense in the style of the analytical program makers. Only music, and onl y Beethoven's music, and only

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

96
this particular music of Beethoven, can tell us with a ny precision what Beethoven's c onception of the blessedness 
at the heart of things actually was. If we want to know, we must list en -- on a still June night , by preference, with 
the breathing of the invisible sea fo r background to the music and the scen t of lime trees drifting through the 
darkness, like some exquisite soft harmony apprehended by another sense. 
(From Music at Night) 
 
 
 
Gesualdo: 
Variations on a Musical Theme 
 
 Space has been explored, systematically and scientifica lly, for more than five centuries; time, for less than 
five generations. Modern geography began in the f ourteen-hundreds with the voyages of Prince Henry the 
Navigator. Modern history and modern archeology came in with Queen Victoria. Except in the Antarctic there is 
today no such thing as a terra incognita; all the corners of all the other con tinents have now been visited. In 
contrast, how vast are the reaches of history which still remain obscure! And how recently acquired is most of our 
knowledge of the past! Almost everything we know abou t paleolithic and neolithic man, about the Sumerian, 
Hittite and Minoan civilizations, about pre-Buddhist India and pre-Columbian America, about the origins of such 
fundamental human arts as ag riculture, metallurgy and wr iting, was discovered within the last sixty or seventy 
years. And there are still new worlds of history to conque r. Even in such well-dug regions as the Near and Middle 
East literally thousands of sites awa it the burrowing archeologist , and thousands more are scattered far and wide 
over Asia, Africa and the Americas. Moreover, there is work  for the explorer in time s and cultures much nearer 
home. For, strange as it may seem, it is only within the la st generation that certain aspects of quite recent European 
history have come to be critically investigated. A very striking example of this failure to explore our own back yard 
is supplied by the history of music.  Practically everybody likes music; bu t practically nobody has heard any music 
composed before 1680. Renaissance poetry, painting and scul pture have been studied in  minutest detail, and the 
labors of five generations of scholars have been made av ailable to the public in hun dreds of monographs, general 
histories, critical appreciations a nd guidebooks. But Renaissance music -- an art which was fully the equal of 
Renaissance poetry, painting and sculptur e -- has received relatively little at tention from scholars and is almost 
unknown to the concert-going public. Donatello and Piero della Francesca, Ti tian and Michelangelo -- their names 
are household words and, in the original or in reproducti on, their works are familiar to everyone. But how few 
people have heard, or even heard of, the music of Dufay and Josquin, of Okeghem and Obrecht, of Ysaac and Wert 
and Marenzio, of Dunstable, Byrd and Victoria! All that can be said is th at, twenty years ago, the number was still 
smaller than it is today. And a couple  of generations earlier the ignorance was almost total. Even so great a 
historian as Burckhardt -- the man who wrote with such insight, such a wealth of erudition, about every other 
aspect of the Renaissance in Italy -- knew next to nothing about the music of his chosen period. It was not his fault; 
there were no modern editions of th e music and nobody ever played or sang it.  Consider, by way of example, the 
Vespers, composed in 1610 by one of the most famous, one of the most historically important of Italian musicians, 
Claudio Monteverdi. After the middle of  the seventeenth century this extrao rdinary masterpiece was never again 
performed until the year 1935. One can say without any exaggeration that, until very recent times, more was 
known about the Fourth Dynasty Egyptians, who built th e pyramids, than about the Flemish and Italian 
contemporaries of Shakespeare who wrote the madrigals. 
 This sort of thing, let us rememb er, has happened before. From the time of the composer's death in 1750 to 
the performance under Mendelssohn, in 1829, of the Passion According to St. Matthew, no European audience had 
ever heard a choral work by John Sebastian Bach. What Mendelssohn and the nineteenth -century musicologists, 
critics and virtuosi did for Bach a nother generation of scholars and perf ormers has begun to do for Bach's 
predecessors, whose works have been re discovered, published in critical edi tions, performed here and there and 
even occasionally recorded. It is gr adually dawning upon us that the three centuries before Bach are just as 
interesting musically speaking, as the two centuries after Bach. 
 There exists in Los Angeles a laudable institution called the Southern  California Chamber Music Society. 
This society sponsors a series of Monday evening concerts, at which, besides much fine and seldom-heard classical

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

97
and contemporary music, many pre-Bach compositions are performed. Among these earlier compositions one 
group stands out in my memory as unique ly interesting -- a group  of madrigals and motets by an almost exact 
contemporary of Shakespeare, Carlo Gesualdo. Another Englis h poet, John Milton, was an admirer of Gesualdo 
and, while in Italy, bought a volume of his madrigals whic h, with a number of other books, he sent home by ship 
from Venice. Milton's admiration is unders tandable; for Gesualdo's music is so strange and, in its strangeness, so 
beautiful that it haunts the memory and fires the imagination. Listening to it, one is filled with questioning wonder. 
What sort of a man was it who wrote such music? Where does it fit into the general musical scheme, and what is its 
relevance for us? In the paragraphs that follow I shall try, in the light of my sadly limited knowledge of Gesualdo's 
time and of Gesualdo's art, to answer, or at least to speculate about, these questions. 
 Let us begin, then, with the biographical facts. Ca rlo Gesualdo was born in or about 1560, either at Naples 
or in one of his father's numerous castles in the neighborhood of Naples. Th e Gesualdi were of ancient and noble 
lineage, had been barons for fifteen ge nerations, counts for eight, dukes for f our or five, and, fo r the past three 
generations, hereditary Princes  of Venosa. Carlo's mother hailed from northern Italy and was a sister of the great 
Cardinal Carlo Borromeo, who died in 1584 and was canoni zed in 1610. In his later years Gesualdo could speak 
not only of my father, the Prince, but even (going one better) of my uncle, the Saint. Of the boy's education we 
know nothing and can only infer, from his later achievement s, that he must have had a very thorough grounding in 
music. 
 Every age has its own characterist ic horrors. In ours there are the Co mmunists and nuclear weapons, there 
are nationalism and the threat of overpopul ation. The violence in which we indul ge is truly monstrous; but it is, so 
to say, official violence, ordered by th e proper authorities, sanctioned by law,  ideologically justified and confined 
to periodical world wars, between which we enjoy the blessings  of law, order and internal  peace. In the Naples of 
Gesualdo's day, violence was ruggedly i ndividualistic, unorganized and chroni c. There was little nationalism and 
world wars were unknown; but dynastic squabbles were frequent and the Barbary Corsairs were incessantly active, 
raiding the coasts of Italy in search of slaves and booty. But the citizen's worst enemies were not the pirates and the 
foreign princes; they were his own nei ghbors. Between the wars and the forays of the infidels there were no lucid 
intervals, such as we enjoy betwee n our wholesale massacres, of civic de cency, but an almost lawless and 
policeless free-for-all in a society composed of a class of nobles, utterly corrupted by Spanish ideas of honor 
(Naples was then a Spanish colony), a small and insignifi cant middle class and a vast mob of plebeians living in 
bestial squalor and savagery, and sunk, head over ears, in the most degrading superstition. It was in this monstrous 
environment that Carlo grew up, an immensely talented and profoundly neurotic member  of the overprivileged 
minority. 
 In 1586 he married Maria d'Avalos, a girl of twenty, but already a wi dow. (Her previous husband, it was 
whispered, had died of too much connubial bliss.) Ge sualdo had two children by this lady, one of his own 
begetting, the other almost cer tainly not; for after two y ears of marriage, the lovely  and lively Donna Maria had 
taken a lover, Don Fabrizio Carafa, Duke of Andria. On the night of October 16, 1590, accompanied by three of his 
retainers, armed with swords , halberds and arquebuses, Gesualdo broke in to his wife's room, found the lovers in 
bed and had them killed. After which he took horse and ga lloped off to one of his cast les where, after liquidating 
his second child (the one of doubtful paternity), he remained for several months -- not to escape the law (for he was 
never prosecuted and, if he had been, would certainly ha ve been acquitted as having done only what any injured 
husband had the right and even the duty to do), but to avoid the private ve ngeance of the Avalos and Carafa 
families. These last were outraged, not so much by the murder  (which was entirely in orde r) as by the fact that the 
killing had been done by lackeys and not by Gesualdo hims elf. According to the code  of honor, blue blood might 
be spilled only by the possessor of blue blood, never by a member of the lower classes. 
 Time passed and the storm, as all storms finally do, blew over. From hi s feudal keep in the hills Gesualdo 
was able to return to Naples and the cultivated society of madrigal-singing amateurs and professional musicians. 
He began composing, he even published. Second and third editions of his madrigals were called for. He was almost 
a best seller. 
 The Prince of Venosa, the Serenissimo as he was called by his respectf ul contemporaries, was now an 
eligible widower, and sometime in 1592 or 1593 his pate rnal uncle, the Archbishop of Naples, entered into 
negotiations with Alfonso II, Duke of Ferrara, with a view  to securing for his nephew a princess of the great house 
of Este. Suitable financial arrangements were made, a nd in February, 1594, the nuptials of Carlo Gesualdo and

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

98
Donna Leonora d'Este were celebrated at  Ferrara with all the usual pomp. Afte r a short stay in the south, Gesualdo 
returned to Ferrara with his bride, now pregnant, rented a palace and settled down for a long stay. 
 Ferrara in 1594 was a setting sun, still dazzling, but on th e brink of darkness. Three years later, on the death 
of Duke Alfonso without a male heir, the city, which was a papal fief, revert ed to its overlord, the Pope, and was 
incorporated into the States of the Church. The glory that was Ferrara vanished overnight, forever. 
 That Ferrara should ever have become a glory is one  of the unlikeliest facts in that long succession of 
actualized improbabilities which make  up human history. The ducal territory was small and, in those malarious 
days, unhealthy. Its material resources were scanty, and th e most important local industry was the smoking of eels, 
caught in the winding channels of the de lta of the Po. Militarily, the state wa s feeble in the extreme. Powerful and 
not always friendly neighbors surrounded it and, to make matters worse, it lay on the invasion route from Germany 
and Austria. In spite of which Ferrara became and for a hun dred and fifty years -- from the middle of the fifteenth 
to the end of the sixteenth century -- remained not only a sovereign state of considerab le political importance, but 
also one of the most brillian t intellectual centers of Western Europe. Th is position the city owed entirely to the 
extraordinary ability and good taste of its rulers, the dukes of the house of Este. In the game of international and 
interdynastic politics, the Estensi were consummately skil lful players. At home they were not too tyrannical, and 
had a happy knack, when discontent ran high, of blaming th eir ministers for everything and so maintaining their 
own popularity. Their domestic life was relatively harmonious . Unlike many of the ruling families of Italy, the 
Estensi seldom murdered one another. True, a few years before Carlo's marriage to Leonora, the Duke had had his 
sister's lover strangled. But this was an exceptional act -- and anyhow he refrained fr om strangling the lady; the 
integrity of the clan was preserved. Bu t from our present point of view the most remarkable thing about the Dukes 
of Ferrara was their steady patronage of talent, especially in  the fields of literature and music. The greatest Italian 
poets of the sixteenth centur y -- from Ariosto at the be ginning to Guarini and Tasso at the end -- were summoned 
to Ferrara, where the dukes either gave them jobs in the admi nistration of the state, or else paid them a pension, so 
that they might devote the whole of their time to literature. Musicians were no less welcome than poets. From 1450 
to 1600 most of the greatest composers of the time visite d Ferrara, and many of them stayed at the court for long 
periods. They came from Burgundy and Flanders, the most  productive centers of early Renaissance music; they 
came from France, they came even fr om faraway England. And later, when the Italians had learned their lesson 
from the North and had become, in their turn, the undispu ted leaders in the field, they came from all over the 
peninsula. The huge square castello at the heart of the city, the ducal hunting lodges, the summer palaces by the 
sea, the mansions of the nobles and the foreign amba ssadors -- all of them resounded with music: Learned 
polyphonic music and popular songs and dances. Music for lute s (there was a functionary at the ducal court whose 
sole duty it was to keep the lutes perpetually in tune) a nd music for the organ, for viols, for wind instruments, for 
the earliest forms of harpsichord and clavichord. Music pe rformed by amateurs sitting around the fire or at a table, 
and music rendered by professional virtuos i. Music in church, music at home and (this was a novelty) music in the 
concert hall. For there were daily concer ts in the various ducal palaces, concerts  in which as many as sixty players 
and singers would take part. On grand occasions -- and at Ferrara there seems to have been a grand occasion at 
least twice a week -- there were masques with choral in terludes, there were plays w ith overtures and incidental 
music, there were performances, in those sunset years of decline, of the first ru dimentary operas. And what 
wonderful voices could be heard at Alfonso's court! Ferrara's Three Singing Ladies were world famous. There was 
Lucrezia Bendidio, there was Laura Pepera ra and, most remarkable of the tri o, there was the beautiful, learned and 
many-talented Tarquinia Molza. But every Eden, alas, has its serpent, and, in Tarquini a's musical paradise, there 
was not merely a reptile to rear its ugly head; there were several Adams as well. 
 Tarquinia married and was widowed; then, in her mi ddle thirties she fell under the spell of that most 
charming and romantic of men, Torquato Tasso. The poet, who wrote a great deal about love, but very seldom 
made it, was alarmed, and, putting up a barrage of platonic vers e, beat a hasty retreat. Tarquinia had to be content, 
for several years, with lovers of less exalted intellectual rank. Then, in her forties, she found another man of genius, 
the great Flemish composer, Giaches Wert, who was in the employ of the Duke of Mantua. Their passion was 
reciprocal and so violent that it created a scandal. The unhappy Tarquinia was exiled to Modena and Wert returned, 
alone, to the court of the Gonzagas. 
 For a man of Gesualdo's gifts and sensibilities, Ferrara combined th e advantages of a seat of higher 
education with those of a h eaven on earth. It was a place where he co uld simultaneously enjoy himself and learn.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

99
And learn he certainly did. The madrigals he composed be fore 1594 are admirable in their workmanship; but their 
style, though his own, is still within the bounds of sixteenth-century music. The madrigals and motets written after 
his stay at Ferrara are beyond those bounds -- far out in a kind of no-man's land. 
 Gesualdo left no memoirs and, in sp ite of his high contemporary reputa tion and his exalted position in the 
world, very little is known of his later lif e, except that he was unhappy and dogged by misfortune. His son by his 
second wife died in childhood. His son by the murdered Donna Maria, the heir to all the family titles and estates, 
grew up to loathe his father and long for his death; but it was he who died first. On e of Gesualdo's daughters went 
to the bad and presented him with several illegitimate grandchildren. Meanwhile he was constantly tormented, says 
a contemporary gossip writer, by a host of demons. His lifelong neurosis had deepened, evidently into something 
like insanity. Apart from music, whic h he went on composing with undiminis hed powers, his only pleasure seems 
to have been physical pain. He would, we are told, submit ecstatically to frequent whippings. These at last became 
a physiological necessity. Acco rding to that much persecu ted philosopher, Tommaso Campanella, the Prince of 
Venosa could never go to the bathroom (cacare non poterat) unless he had first been flogged by a servant specially 
trained to perform this duty. Remorse for the crimes of  his youth weighed heavily on Gesualdo's conscience. The 
law might excuse, public opinion might even  approve; but Holy Writ was explicit: Thou shalt not kill. A few years 
before his death in 1613 he endowed a Capuchin friary  in his native town of Gesualdo and built a handsome 
church. Over the altar hung a huge penitential picture,  painted to the prince's order and under his personal 
direction. This picture, which still survives, represents Christ the Judge seated on high and flanked by the Blessed 
Virgin and the Archangel Michael. Below Him, arranged sy mmetrically, in descending tie rs, to right and left, are 
Saint Francis and Saint Mary Magdalen, Saint Dominic and Saint Catherine of Siena, all of them, to judge by their 
gestures, emphatically interceding with the Savior on behalf of Carlo Gesualdo, who kneels in the lower left-hand 
corner, dressed in black velvet and an enormous ruff, while, splendid in the scarlet robes of a Prince of the Church, 
his uncle, the Saint, stands beside h im, with one hand resting protectively on the sinner's shoulder. Opposite them 
kneels Carlo's aunt, Isabella Borromeo, in the costume of a nun, and at the center of this family group is the 
murdered child, as a heavenly cherub. Below, at the very bottom of the composition, Donna Maria and the Duke of 
Andria are seen roasting ev erlastingly in those flames from which the man who had them butchered still hopes 
against hope to be delivered. 
 So much for the facts of our comp oser's life -- facts which confirm an old and slightly disquieting truth: 
namely, that between an artist's work and his personal behavior there is no very obvious correspondence. The work 
may be sublime, the behavior anything from silly to insane and criminal. Conversely the behavior may be 
blameless and the work uninteresting or downright bad. Ar tistic merit has nothing to do with any other kind of 
merit. In the language of theology, talent  is a gratuitous grace, completely unconnected with saving grace or even 
with ordinary virtue or sanity. 
 From the man we now pass to his st range music. Like most of the gr eat composers of his day, Gesualdo 
wrote exclusively for the human voice -- to be more precise, for groups of five or six soloists singing 
contrapuntally. All his five- or six-part compositions bel ong to one or other of two cl osely related musical forms, 
the madrigal and the motet. The motet is the older of th e two forms and consists of a setting, for any number of 
voices from three to twelve, of a short passage, in Latin, from the Bible or some othe r sacred text. Madrigals may 
be defined as nonreligious motets. They are settings, not of sacred Latin texts, but of short poems in the vernacular. 
In most cases, these settings were for five voices; but the composer was free to write for any number of parts from 
three to eight or more. 
 The madrigal came into existence in the thirties of the sixteenth century and, for seventy or eighty years, 
remained the favorite art form of all composers of secular music. Contrapuntal writing in five parts is never likely 
to be popular, and the madrigal made its appeal, not to th e general public, but to a select audience of professional 
musicians and highly educated amateurs, largely aristocratic and connected for the most part with one or other of 
the princely or ecclesiastical courts of the day. (One is  amazed, when one reads the hi story of renaissance music, 
by the good taste of Europe's earlier rule rs. Popes and emperors, kings, princes and cardinals -- they never make a 
mistake. Invariably, one might almost say infallibly, they choose for their chapel masters and court composers the 
men whose reputation has stood the test of time and whom we now recognize as the most gifted musicians of their 
day. Left to themselves, what sort of musicians would our  twentieth-century monarchs and presidents choose to 
patronize? One shudders to think.)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

100
 Gesualdo wrote madrigals, and a madrig al, as we have seen, is a non-relig ious motet. But what else is it? 
Let us begin by saying what it is not. First and foremost, the madrigal, t hough sung, is not a son g. It does not, that 
is to say, consist of a tune, repeated stanza after stanza. Nor has it anyt hing to do with the art form known to later 
musicians as the aria. An aria is a piece of music for a solo voice, accompanied by in struments or by other voices. 
It begins, in most cases, with an intr oduction, states a melodic th eme in one key, states a second theme in another 
key, goes into a series of m odulations and ends with a recapitulation of one or both themes in the original key. 
Nothing of all this is to be found in the madrigal. In th e madrigal there is no solo singing. All the five or more 
voices are of equal importance, and they move, so to speak , straight ahead, whereas the aria and the song move in 
the equivalent of circles or spirals. In other words, there are, in the madr igal, no returns to a starting point, no 
systematic recapitulations. Its form bears no resemblance to the sonata form or even to the suite form. It might be 
described as a choral tone poem, written  in counterpoint. When counterpoint is  written within a structural pattern, 
such as the fugue or canon, the listener  can follow the intricacies of the music almost indefinitely. But where the 
counterpoint has no structural patter n imposed upon it, where it moves forw ard freely, without any returns to a 
starting point, the ear finds it very hard to follow it, attentively and understandingly, for more than a few minutes at 
a stretch. Hence the brevity of the typical madrigal, the extraordinary succinctness of its style. 
 During the three quarters of a century  of its existence, the madrigal underwent a steady development in the 
direction of completer, ever intenser expressiveness. At the beginning of the period it  is a piece of emotionally 
neutral polyphony, whose whole beauty cons ists in the richness and complexity of its many-voiced texture. At the 
end, in the work of such masters as Marenzio, Montev erdi and, above all, Gesualdo, it has become a kind of 
musical miracle, in which seemingly incompatible elements are reconciled in a higher synthesis. The intricacies of 
polyphony are made to yield the most powerfully expressive  effects, and this polyphony has become so flexible 
that it can, at any moment, transmute itself into blocks of chords or a passage of dramatic declamation. 
 During his stay at Ferrara, Gesualdo  was in contact with the most "a dvanced" musicians of his day. A few 
miles away, at Mantua, the great Giach es Wert, sick and prematurely old, wa s still composing; and at the same 
court lived a much younger musician, Claudio Monteverdi, who was to carry to completion the revolution in music 
begun by Wert. That revolution was the supersession of  polyphony by monody, the substitution of the solo voice, 
with instrumental or vocal accompaniment, for the madrig alist's five or six voices of equal importance. Gesualdo 
did not follow the Mantuans into monody; but he was certainly influen ced by Wert's essays in musical 
expressionism. Those strange cries of grief, pain and despair, which occur so frequently in his later madrigals, were 
echoes of the cries introduced by Wert into his dramatic cantatas. 
 At Ferrara itself Gesualdo's closest musical friends were Count Fontanelli and a professional composer and 
virtuoso, Luzzasco Luzzaschi. Like Gesualdo, Fontanelli wa s an aristocrat and had murdered an unfaithful wife; 
unlike Gesualdo, he was not a man of genius, merely a good musician passionately in terested in the latest 
developments of the art. Luzzaschi was a writer of madrigals, and had invent ed a number of expressive devices, 
which Gesualdo employed in his own later productions. More important, he was the only man who knew how to 
play on, and even compose for, an ex traordinary machine, which was the gr eatest curiosity in Duke Alfonso's 
collection of musical instruments. This was the archi cembalo, a large keyboard inst rument belonging to the 
harpsichord family, but so designed that a player could distinguish, for example, between B flat and A sharp, could 
descend chromatically from E, through E flat, D sharp, D, D flat, C sharp to a final C major chord. The 
archicembalo required thirty-one keys to cover each octave and must have been fantastically difficult to play and 
still harder, one would imagine, to compose for. Th e followers of Schoenberg are far behind Luzzaschi; their scale 
has only twelve tones, his, thirty-one. Luzzaschi's thirty-one-tone co mpositions (none of which, unfortunately, 
survive) and his own experiments on the archicembalo  profoundly influenced the style of Gesualdo's later 
madrigals. Forty years ago, the Oxford musicologist, Er nest Walker, remarked that Gesualdo's most famous 
madrigal, Moro lasso, sounded like "Wagner gone wrong." Hardly an adequate criticism of  Gesualdo, but not 
without significance. 
 The mention of Wagner is fully justified; for the incessant chromaticisms of Gesualdo's later writing found 
no parallel in music until the time of Tristan. As for the "gone-wrongness" -- this is due to Gesualdo's 
unprecedented and, until recent times, almost unimitated tr eatment of harmonic progression. In his madrigals 
successive chords are related in ways which conform neither to the rules of sixteenth-century polyphony, nor to the 
rules of harmony which hold good from the middle of the seventeenth century to the beginning of the twentieth. An

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

101
infallible ear is all that, in most cases, preserves these strange and beautiful progressions from seeming altogether 
arbitrary and chaotic. Thanks to that infallible ear of  his, Gesualdo's harmonies mo ve, always astonishingly, but 
always with a logic of their own, fr om one impossible, but pe rfectly satisfying, beauty  to another. And the 
harmonic strangeness is neve r allowed to continue for too long at a stretch. With consummate art, Gesualdo 
alternates these extraordinary passages of Wagner-gone-wrong with pass ages of pure traditional polyphony. To be 
fully effective, every elaboration must be shown in a setting of simplicity, ever y revolutionary novelty should 
emerge from a background of the familiar. For the composers of arias, the simple and familiar background for their 
floridly expressive melodies was a steady, rhythmically  constant accompaniment. For Gesualdo, simplicity and 
familiarity meant the rich, many-voiced texture of cont rapuntal writing. The setti ng for Wagner-gone-wrong is 
Palestrina. 
 Every madrigal is the setting of a short poem in the vernacular, just as every motet is the setting of a short 
passage from the Vulgate or some other piece of sacred La tin literature. The texts of the motets were generally in 
prose, and the early polyphonists saw no obvious reason for imposing upon this es sentially rectilinear material a 
circular musical form. After the inven tion of the aria, the compos ers of music for prose te xts habitually distorted 
the sense and rhythm of their words in order to force them into the circular, verselike patterns of their new art form. 
From Alessandro Scarlatti, through Bach and Handel, Mo zart, Haydn and Mendelssohn -- all the great composers 
from 1650 to 1850 provide examples, in their musical settings, of what may be called the versification of prose. To 
do this, they were compelled to repeat  phrases and individual words again and again, to prolong single syllables to 
inordinate length, to recapitulate, note  for note, or with variations, entir e paragraphs. How different was the 
procedure of the madrigalists! Instead of versifying prose, they found it necessary, because of the nature of their art 
form, to prosify verse. The regular recurrences of lines a nd stanzas -- these have no place  in the madrigal, just as 
they have no place in the motet. Like good prose, the madrig al is rectilinear, not circular . Its movement is straight 
ahead, irreversible, asymmetrical. When they set a piece of poetry to music, the madr igalists set it phrase by 
phrase, giving to each phrase, even each word, its suit able expression and linking the successive moods by a 
constant adaptation of the polyphonic writing, not by the imposition from outside of a structural pattern. Every 
madrigal, as I have said, is a choral tone poem. But instead of lasting for a whol e hour, like the huge, spectacular 
machines of Liszt and Richard Strauss, it concentrates it s changing moods into three or  four minutes of elaborate 
and yet intensely expressive counterpoint. 
 The Italian madrigalists chose their texts, for the most part, from the best poets. Dante was considered too 
harsh and old-fashioned; but his great  fourteenth-century successor, Petrar ch, remained a perennial favorite. 
Among more recent poets, Ariosto, though set fairly freque ntly, was much less popular than Guarini and Tasso, 
whose emotional tone was more emphatic and who took pleas ure in just those violent contrasts of feeling which 
lent themselves most perfectly to the purposes of the madrigalist. In their shorter pieces (pieces written expressly to 
be set to music) Tasso and his contem poraries made use of a kind of epigra mmatic style, in which antithesis, 
paradox and oxymoron played a major part and were turned into a literary convention, so  that every versifier now 
talked of dolorous joy, sweet agony, loathing love and living death -- to the immense delig ht of the musicians, for 
whom these emotional ambiguities, these abrupt changes of feeling offered golden opportunities. 
 Gesualdo was a personal friend of Torquato Tasso a nd, during the last, mad, wande ring years of the poet's 
life, helped him with money and letter s of introduction. As we should expect, he set a number of Tasso's poems to 
music. For the rest he made use of anything that came to hand. Many of his finest madrigals are based on snatches 
of verse having no litera ry merit whatsoever. That they served his pu rpose was due to the fact that they were 
written in the current idiom and contained plenty of emphatically contras ting words, which he could set to 
appropriately expressive music. Gesualdo's indifference to  the poetical quality of his texts, and his methods of 
setting words to music, are very cl early illustrated in one of the mo st astonishing of his madrigals, Ardita 
zanzaretta -- a work, incidentally, whose performance at Los Angeles in the Autumn of 1955 was probably the first 
in more than three hundred years. This extraordinary li ttle masterpiece compresses into less than three minutes 
every mood from the cheerfully indifferent  to the perversely volup tuous, from the gay to the tragic, and in the 
process employs every musical resource, from trad itional polyphony to Wagner-gone-wrong chromaticism and the 
strangest harmonic progressions, from galloping rhythms to passages of long, suspended notes. Then we look at the 
text and discover that this amazing music is the setti ng of half-a-dozen lines of  doggerel. The theme of Ardita 
zanzaretta is the same as the theme of a tiny poem by Tasso, ta steless enough in all conscience, but written with a

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

102
certain elegance of style. A little mosquito (zanzaretta) settles on the bosom of the be loved, bites and gets swatted 
by the exasperated lady. What a delicious fate, muses Tasso, to die in a place where it is such bliss to swoon away! 
 
 Felice te felice 
 piú che net rogo oriental Fenice! 
 
(Oh happy, happy bug -- more happy than the Phoenix on its oriental pyre!) 
 Gesualdo's nameless librettist takes the same subject, ro bs it of whatever charm Tasso was able to lend it, 
and emphasizes the bloodiness of the mosquito's fate by in troducing -- twice over in the space of only six lines -- 
the word stringere, meaning to squeeze, squash, squelch. Another improvement on Tasso is the addition of a 
playful sally by the lover. Since he longs to share the mosq uito's fate, he too will take a bite in the hope of being 
squashed to death on the lady's bosom. What follows is a literal translati on of this nonsense, accompanied by a 
description of the music accompanying each phrase. "A bol d little mosquito bites the fair breast of her who 
consumes my heart." This is set to a piece of pure neut ral polyphony, very rapid and, despite its textural richness, 
very light. But the lady is not content with consuming the lover's heart; she also "keeps it in cruel pain." Here the 
dancing polyphony of the first bars gives place to a series of chords moving slowly from dissonance to unprepared 
dissonance. The pain, however unreal in the text, become s in the music genuinely ex cruciating. Now the mosquito 
"makes its escape, but rashly flies back  to that fair breast which steals my heart away. Whereupon she catches it." 
All this is rendered in the same kind of rapid, emotionally neutral polyphony as was heard in the opening bars. But 
now comes another change. The lady not only catches the insect, "she squeeze s it and gives it death." The word 
morte, death, occurs in almost all Gesualdo's madrigals. So metimes it carries its literal meaning; more often, 
however, it is used figuratively, to signify sensual ecsta sy, the swoon of love. But this makes no difference to 
Gesualdo. Whatever its real significance,  and whoever it is that may be dyi ng (the lover metaphorically or, in a 
literal sense, a friend, a mosquito, the crucified Savior), he gives the word, morte, a musical expression of the most 
tragic and excruciating kind. For the remorseful assassin, death was evidently the most terrifying of prospects. 
 From the insect's long-drawn mu sical martyrdom, we return to cheerfulness and pure polyphony. "To share 
its happy fate, I too will bite you." Gesualdo was a pain-loving  masochist and this playful suggestion of sadism left 
him unmoved. The counterpoint glides along in a state of emotional neutrality. Then comes a passage of chromatic 
yearning on the words "my beloved, my precious one." Then polyphony again. "And if you catch and squeeze me. . 
." After this, the music becomes unadulte rated Gesualdo. There is a cry of pain -- ahi! -- and then "I will swoon 
away and, upon that fair breas t, taste delicious poison." Th e musical setting of these fi nal words is a concentrated 
version of the love-potion scene in Tristan -- the chief difference being that Gesualdo's harmonic progressions are 
far bolder than any attempted, two and a half centuries later, by Richard Wagner. 
 Should pictures tell stories? Shoul d music have a connection with literature? In the past the answer would 
have been, unanimously, yes. Every gr eat painter was a raconteur of Biblic al or mythological anecdotes; every 
great composer was a setter-to-music of sacred or profane texts. Today the intrusion of literature into the plastic 
arts is regarded almost as a crime. In the field of music, this anti-literary reign of terror has been less savage. 
Program music is deplored (not without reason, considering the horrors bequeathed to us by the Victorian era); but 
in spite of much talk about "pure music," good compos ers still write songs, masses, operas and cantatas. Good 
painters would do well to follow their example and permit them selves to be inspired to still better painting by the 
promptings of a literary theme. In the hands of a bad pa inter, pictorial storytelling,  however sublime the subject 
matter, is merely comicstrip  art on a large scale. But wh en a good painter tells the same  story, the case is entirely 
different. The exigencies of illustration -- the fact that he  has to show such-and-such personages, in such-and-such 
an environment, performing such-and-such actions -- st imulates his imagination on every level, including the 
purely pictorial level, with the result that he produces a work which, though literary, is of the highest quality as a 
formal composition. Take any famous painting of the past -- Botticelli's "Calumny of Apelles," for example, or 
Titian's "Bacchus and Ariadne." Both of these are admirable illustrations; but both are much more than illustrations 
-- they are very complex and yet perfectly harmonious and unified arrangements of forms and colors. Moreover the 
richness of their formal material is a direct consequence of their literary subject matter. Left to itself, the pictorial 
imagination even of a painter of genius could never conjure up such a subtle and complicated pattern of shapes and 
hues as we find in these illustrations of texts by Luci an and Ovid. To achieve their purely plastic triumphs,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

103
Botticelli and Titian required to be stimulated by a literary theme. It is a highly significant fact that, in no abstract 
or non-representational painting of t oday, do we find a purely formal co mposition having a nything like the 
richness, the harmonious complexity, created in the process of telling a story, by the masters of earlier periods. The 
traditional distinction between the crafts and the fine arts is based, among other things, on degrees of complexity. 
A good picture is a greater work of art than a good bow l or a good vase. Why? Because it unifies in one 
harmonious whole more, and more diverse, elements of  human experience than are or can be unified and 
harmonized in the pot. Some of the non-re presentational pictures pa inted in the course of the last fifty years are 
very beautiful; but even the best of them are minor wo rks, inasmuch as the number of elements of human 
experience which they combine and harmonize is pitifully small. In them we look in vain for that ordered 
profusion, that lavish and yet perfectly controlled displa y of intellectual wealth, whic h we discover in the best 
works of the "literary" painters of the past. 
 In this respect the composer is more fortunate than the painter. It is psychologi cally possible to write "pure 
music" that shall be just as harmoniously complex, just as rich in unified diversities, as music inspired by a literary 
text. But even in music the intrusion of literature has often been beneficent. But for the challenge presented by a 
rather absurd anecdote couched in very feeble langua ge, Beethoven would never have  produced the astonishing 
"pure music" of the second act of Fidelio. And it was Da Ponte, with his rhymed versions of the st ories of Figaro 
and Don Giovanni, who stimulated Mozart to reveal himself in the fullness of his genius. Where music is a matter 
of monody and harmony, with a structural pattern (the sonata form or the suite form) imposed, so to speak, from 
the outside, it is easy to write "pure music," in which the successive moods shall be expressed, at some length, in 
successive movements. But where there is no structural pattern, where the style is polyphonic and the movement of 
the music is not circular, but straight ahead, irreversible and rectilinear, the case is different. Such a style demands 
extreme brevity and the utmost succinctness of expression.  To meet these demands for brevity and succinctness, 
the musical imagination requires a text -- and a text , moreover, of the kind favored by the madrigalists, 
paradoxical, antithetical, full of  
 
 All things counter, original, spare, strange  
 Whatever is fickle, freckled (who know how?)  
 With swift, slow; sweet, sour; adazzle, dim.  
 
Contemporary musicians, who aspire to write "pure music" in forms as rich, subtle and compact as those devised 
by Gesualdo and his contemporaries, would do well to turn once more to the poets. 
(From Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow) 
 
 
 
MATTERS OF TASTE AND STYLE 
 
 
 
Variations on a Baroque Tomb 
 
 "The skeleton," as we all know, "was  invisible in the happy days of pagan art." And invisible it remained, in 
spite of Christianity, for most of the centuries that followed. Throughout the Middle Ages, the knights, the mitered 
bishops, the ladies who warm their feet on the backs of little dogs -- all are reassuringly in the flesh. No skulls 
adorn their tombs, no bones, no grisly reapers. Artists in words may cry, "Alas, my heart will break in three; 
Terribilis mors conturbat me." Artists in stone are conten t to carve the likeness of  a sleeper upon a bed. The 
Renaissance comes and still the sleep persists, tranquil amid the sculptured dreams of a pa radise half earthly, half 
celestial. 
 
 Those Pans and Nymphs ye wot of, and perchance 
 Some tripod, thyrsus, with a vase or so, 
 The Savior at his sermon on the mount,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

104
 St. Praxed in a glory, and one Pan 
 Ready to twitch the Ny mph's last garment off, 
 And Moses with the tables.  
 
 But by the middle of the sixteenth century a change has taken place. The effigy no longer sleeps, but opens 
its eyes and sits up -- ideally noble, as on the Medicean  tombs, or soberly a portrait, like any one of those 
admirable busts in their round niches be tween the pilasters of a classical design. And at th e base, below the Latin 
inscription, it not infrequently  happens (at any rate in Ro me and after 1550) that a li ttle skull, in bone-white 
marble, reminds the onlooker of what he himself will soon  be, of what the original of the portrait has already 
become. 
 Why should the death's head have become fashionable at  this particular moment of history? The religiously 
minded might surmise that it had something to do with the Counter Reformation; the medically minded, that it was 
connected with that sixteenth-century pandemic of syphili s, whose noseless victims were a constant reminder of 
man's latter end; the artistically minded, that some mortuary sculptor of the time had a taste for, and a happy knack 
with, bones. I do not venture to decide between the possi ble alternatives, but am c ontent to record the fact, 
observable by anyone who has been in Rome, that there, after the middle of the century, the skulls indubitably are. 
 As the years pass these reminders of mortality assume  an even greater importan ce. From being miniatures 
they grow in a short time into full-blown, death-sized replicas of the thing behind the face. And suddenly, imitating 
those bodiless seraphs of medieval and Renaissance painting, they sprout a pair of wings a nd learn to fly. 
Meanwhile the art of the late Renai ssance has become the Baroque. By an  aesthetic necessity, because it is 
impossible for self-conscious artists to go on doing what has been supremel y well done by their predecessors, the 
symmetrical gives place to the disbalan ced, the static to the dynamic, the form alized to the realistic. Statues are 
caught in the act of changing their positions; pictorial com positions try to break out of their frames. Where there 
was understatement, there is now emphasis; where there was measure and humanity, th ere is now the enormous, 
the astounding, the demigod and the epileptic sub-man. 
 Consider, for example, those skulls  on the monuments. They have grown in size; their truth to death is 
overpowering and, to heighten the effect of verisimilitude, th e sculptor has shifted them from their old place on the 
central axis and now sh ows them, casual and unposed, in profile or th ree-quarters face, looking up to heaven or 
down into the grave. And their wings! Vast, wildly beating, windblown -- the wings of vultures in a hurricane. The 
appetite for the inordinate grows with what it feeds upon, and along with it grow the virtuosity of the artists and the 
willingness of their patrons to pay for ever more astoundi ng monuments. By 1630 the skull is no longer adequate 
as a memento mori; it has become necessary to represent the entire skeleton. 
 The most grandiose of these reminders of our mort ality are the mighty skeletons which Bernini made for 
the tombs of Urban VIII and Alexander VII in St. Peter's. Ma jestic in his vestments and intensely alive, each of the 
two Popes sits there aloft, blessing his people. Some feet below him, on either side, are his special Virtues -- Faith, 
Temperance, Fortitude, who knows? In the middle, below the Pontiff, is the gigantic emblem of death. On Urban's 
tomb the skeleton is holding (slightly cock-eyed, for it would be intolerably old-fash ioned and unrealistic if the 
thing were perfectly level) a black marble scroll inscri bed with the Pope's name a nd title; on Alexander's the 
monster has been "stopped," as the photographers say, in the act of shooting up from  the doorway leading into the 
vault. Up it comes, like a rocket, at an angle of sixty or seventy degrees, and as  it rises it effort lessly lifts six or 
seven tons of the red marble drapery, which mitigates the rigidities of architecture and transforms the statically 
geometrical into something mobile and indeterminate. 
 The emphasis, in these tw o extraordinary works, is not on heav en, hell, and purgatory, but on physical 
dissolution and the grave. The terror which inspired such works as the Dies Irae was of the second death, the death 
inflicted by an angry judge upon the sinne r's soul. Here, on the contrary, the theme is the first death, the abrupt 
passage from animation to insensibility and from worldly glory to supper with the convocation of politic worms. 
 
 Chi un tempo, carco d'amorose prede,  
 ebbe l'ostro alle guance e l'oro al crine,  
 deforme, arido teschio, ecco, si vede.  
 
 Bernini's tombs are by no means unique. The Roman c hurches are full of cautionary skeletons. In Santa

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

105
Maria sopra Minerva, for example, ther e is a small monument attached to one  of the columns on the north side of 
the church. It commemorates a certain Vizzani, if I remember rightly, a jurisconsult who died some time before the 
middle of the seventeenth century. Here, as in the wall monuments of the High Renaissance, a bust looks out of a 
rounded niche placed above the long Latin  catalogue of the dead man's claims upon the attention of posterity. It is 
the bust, so intensely life-like as to be almost a caricatur e, of a florid individual in  his middle forties, no fool 
evidently, but wearing an expression of serene a nd unquestioning complacency. Socially, professionally, 
financially, what a huge success his life has been! And ho w strongly, like Milton, he feels that "nothing profits 
more than self-esteem founded on just and right"! But suddenly we become aw are that the bust in  its round frame 
is being held in an almost amorous embrace by a great skel eton in high relief, whizzing diagonally, from left to 
right, across the monument. The lawyer and all his achieve ments, all his self-satisfac tion, are being wafted away 
into darkness and oblivion. 
 Of the same kind, but still more astounding, are the to mbs of the Pallavicino family in San Francesco a 
Ripa. Executed by Mazzuoli at the beginning of the eighteenth century, these monuments are among the last and at 
the same time the most extravagant outflowerings of the Baroque spirit. Admirably car ved, the usual Virtues keep 
guard at the base of each of the vast  pyramidal structures. Above them, flapping huge wings, a ten-foot skeleton in 
bronze holds up for our inspecti on a pair of oval frames, containing busts of  the departed Pallavicini. On one side 
of the family chapel we see the likenesses of two pr incely ecclesiastics. Death holds them with a studied 
carelessness, tilting their frames a little, one to the left, th e other to the right, so that the grave ascetic faces look 
out, as though through the ports of a ro lling ship. Opposite them, in the hands  of another and, if possible, even 
more frightful skeleton, are two more members of the family  -- an elderly princess, this  time, and her spouse. And 
what a spouse! Under the majestic wig the face is gross, many-chinned, complacently imbecile. High blood 
pressure inflates the whole squat person almost to bursti ng point; pride keeps the pig-s nout chronically pointing to 
the skies. And it is Death w ho now holds him aloft; it is Corruption who, with triumphant derision, exhibits him, 
forever pilloried in marble, a grotesque and pitiable example of human bumptiousness. 
 Looking at the little fat man up there in the skeleton's clutches, one reflects, with a certain astonishment, 
that some Pallavicino must have ordered and presumably pa id for this strange monument  to a departed relative. 
With what intentions? To display the absurdity of the old gentleman's pretensions to grandeur? To make a mock of 
everything he had lived for? The answer to these questions is, at least in part , affirmative. All these Baroque tombs 
were doctrinally sound. The heirs of popes and princes la id out huge sums to celebrate the glories of their 
distinguished forebears -- but laid them out on monuments whose emphatically Christian theme is the transience of 
earthly greatness and the vanity of human wishes. After which they addressed themselves with redoubled energy to 
the task of satisfying their own cravings for money, position and power. A belief in hell and the knowledge that 
every ambition is doomed to frustration at the hands of a skeleton have never prevented the majority of human 
beings from behaving as though death were no more than an unfounded rumo r and survival, a thing beyond the 
bounds of possibility. The men of the Bar oque differed from those of other epoc hs not in what they actually did, 
not even in what they thought about t hose doings, but in what they were r eady to express of their thoughts. They 
liked an art that harps on death and corruption, and were neither better nor worse than we who are reticent about 
such things. 
 The fantastic dance of deat h in San Francesco a Ripa is  almost the last of its ki nd. Thirty years after it was 
carved, Robert Blair could achieve a modest popularity by writing such lines as these: 
 
 Methinks I see thee with thy head low laid,  
 While surfeited upon thy damask cheek  
 The high-fed worm, in lazy volumes rolled,  
 Riots unscared.  
 
 But eighteenth-century sculptors made no attempt to realize these gruesome images. On graves and 
monuments Death no longer comments upon the mad pretensi ons of his victims. Broken columns, extinguished 
torches, weeping angels and muses -- these are now the emblems in vogue. The artist and his patron are concerned 
to evoke sentiments less painful than  the horror of corruption. With the ni neteenth century we enter an age of 
stylistic revivals; but there is never a return to the mortuary fashions of the Baroque. From the time of Mazzuoli 
until the present day no monument to any important European has been adorned with death's heads or skeletons.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

106
 We live habitually on at least three levels -- the level of strictly individual existence, the level of intellectual 
abstraction and the level of historical  necessity and social convention. On th e first of these le vels our life is 
completely private; on the others it is, at least partiall y, a shared and public life. Thus, writing about death, I am on 
the level of intellectual abstraction. Participating in the life of a generation to which the mortuary art of the 
Baroque seems odd and alien, I am on the le vel of history. But when I actually co me to die, I shall be on the first 
level, the level of exclusively indivi dual experience. That which, in human lif e, is shared and public has always 
been regarded as more respectable than that which is pr ivate. Kings have their Astronomers Royal, emperors their 
official Historiographers; but ther e are no Royal Gastronomers, no Papal or Imperial Pornographers. Among 
crimes, the social and the historical are condoned as last infirmities of noble minds, and their perpetrators are very 
generally admired. The lustful and in temperate, on the contrary, are conde mned by all -- even by themselves 
(which was why Jesus so much preferre d them to the respectable Pharisees). We have no God of Brothels, but the 
God of Battles, alas, is still going strong. 
 Baroque mortuary sculpture has as its basic subject matter the conflict, on one important front, between the 
public and the private, between the social and the individual,  between the historical and the existential. The prince 
in his curly wig, the Pope in his vestme nts, the lawyer with his Latin eulogy a nd his smirk of self-satisfaction -- all 
these are pillars of society, representa tives of great historical forces and even makers of history. But under smirk 
and wig and tiara is the body with its unsharable physiological processes, is the psyche with its insights and sudden 
graces, its abysmal imbecilities and its unavowable desires.  Every public figure -- and to  some extent we are all 
public figures -- is also an island univer se of private experiences; and the most private of all these experiences is 
that of falling out of history, of being separated from society -- in a word, the experience of death. 
 Based as they always are upon ignora nce -- invincible in  some cases, voluntary and selective in others -- 
historical generalizations can never be mo re than partially true. In spite of wh ich and at the risk of distorting the 
facts to fit a theory, I would suggest that, at any given period, preoccupati on with death is in inverse ratio to the 
prevalence of a belief in man's perfectibility through and in a properly organized society. In the art and literature of 
the age of Condorcet, of the age of Herbert Spencer and Ka rl Marx, of the age of Lenin and the Webbs there are 
few skeletons. Why? Because it was dur ing the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that men came to believe in 
progress, in the march of history toward an ever bigger and better future, in salvation, not for the individual, but for 
society. The emphasis is on history and e nvironment, which are regarded as the primary determinants of individual 
destiny. Indeed, among ort hodox Marxians they are now  (since the canonization of  Lysenko and the anathema 
pronounced on "reactionary Morganism") re garded as the sole determinants. Predestination, whether Augustinian 
or Mendelian, whether karmic or genetic, has been ruled out, and we ar e back with Helvetius and his shepherd 
boys who can all be tran sformed into Newtons, back with Dr. Watson a nd his infinitely condi tionable infants. But 
meanwhile the fact remains that, in this still unregenerate world, each of us inherits a physique and a temperament. 
Moreover the career of every individual man or woman is essentially non-progressive. We reach maturity only to 
decline into decrepitude and the body's death. Could anything be more painfully obvious? And yet how rarely in 
the course of the past two hundred and fifty years has death been made the theme of any considerable work of art! 
Among the great painters only Goya has c hosen to treat of death, and then only of death by violence, death in war. 
The mortuary sculptors, as we have seen, harp only on the sentiments surrounding death -- sentiments ranging from 
the noble to the tender and even the voluptuous. (The most delicious buttocks in the whole repertory of art are to be 
found on Canova's monument to the last of the Stuarts.) 
 In the literature of this same peri od death has been handled more frequen tly than in painting or sculpture, 
but only once (to my knowledge, at least) with complete adequacy. Tolstoy's The Death of Ivan Ilyitch is one of the 
artistically most perfect and at the same time one of the most terrible books ever written. It is the story of an utterly 
commonplace man who is compelled to discover, step by agoni zing step, that the public personage with whom, all 
his life, he has identified himself is hardly more than a figment of the collective imagination, and that his essential 
self is the solitary, insulated being who falls sick and suffe rs, rejects and is rejected by the world and finally (for 
the story has a happy ending) gives in to his destiny and in the act of surrender, at the very moment of death, finds 
himself alone and naked in the presence of the Light. Th e Baroque sculptors are concerned with the same theme 
but they protest too much and their conscious striving for s ublimity is apt to defeat its own object. Tolstoy is never 
emphatic, indulges in no rhetorical flour ishes, speaks simply of the most difficult matters and flatly, matter-of-
factly of the most terrible. That is why his book has su ch power and is so profoundly disturbing to our habitual

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

107
complacency. We are shocked by it in much the same way as we are shocked by pornography -- and for the same 
reason. Sex is almost as completely private a matter as death, and a work of art which powerfully expresses the 
truth about either of them is very painful to the respect able public figure we imagin e ourselves to be. Nobody can 
have the consolations of religion or  philosophy unless he has first experi enced their desolations. And nothing is 
more desolating than a thorough knowledge of the private self. Hence the utility of such books as Ivan Ilyitch and, I 
would venture to add, such books as Henry Miller's Tropic of Cancer. 
 And here let me add a parentheti cal note on the pornography of the age which witnessed the rise of the 
ideas of progress and social salvation. Most of it is merely  pretty, an affair of wish-fulfillments -- Boucher carried 
to his logical conclusion. The most celebrated pornographer of the time, the Marquis de Sade, is a mixture of 
escapist maniac and philosophe. He lives in a world where insane phantasy alternates with post-Voltairean 
ratiocination; where impossible orgies are interrupted in order that the participants may talk, sometimes shrewdly, 
but more often in the shallowest eighteenth-century way, about morals , politics and metaphysics. Here, for 
example, is a typical specimen of Sa dian sociology. "Is incest dangerous? Cert ainly not. It extends family ties and 
consequently renders more active the ci tizen's love of his fatherland." In th is passage, as throughout the work of 
this oddest product of the Enlightenment, we see the public figure doing his sill y best to rationalize the essentially 
unrationalizable facts of private existe nce. But what we need, if we are to  know ourselves, is the truthful and 
penetrating expression in art of precisely these unrationalizable f acts -- the facts of death, as in Ivan Ilyitch, the 
facts of sex, as in Tropic of Cancer, the facts of pain and cruelty, as in Goya's Disasters, the facts of fear and 
disgust and fatigue, as in that most  horrifyingly truthful of war books, The Naked and the Dead. Ignorance is a 
bliss we can never afford; but to know  only ourselves is not enough. If it is to be a fruitful desolation, self-
knowledge must be made the road to a knowledge of the Other. Unmitigated, it is but another form of ignorance 
and can lead only to despair or complacent cynicism. Floundering between time and eternity, we are amphibians 
and must accept the fact. Noverim me, noverim Te, the prayer expresses an essentially realistic attitude toward the 
universe in which, willy-nilly, we have to live and to die. 
 Death is not the only private experience with which Baroque art concerns itself. A few yards from the 
Pallavicino tombs reclines Bernini's statue of Blessed L udovica Albertoni in ecstasy. Here, as in the case of the 
same artist's more celebrated St. Teresa, the experience recorded is of a privacy so special that, at a first glance, the 
spectator feels a shock of embarrassment. Entering those rich chapels in San Francesco and Santa Maria della 
Vittoria, one has the impression of having opened a bedroom  door at the most inopportune of moments, almost of 
having opened The Tropic of Cancer at one of its most startling pages. The posture of the ecstatics, their expression 
and the exuberance of the tripe-like drapery which surround s them and, in the Albertoni's case, overflows in a kind 
of peritoneal cataract onto the altar below -- all conspire to emphasize the fact that, though saints may be important 
historical figures, their physiology is as disquietingly private as anyone else's. 
 By the inner logic of the tradit ion within which they worked, Baroque artists were committed to a 
systematic exploitation of the inor dinate. Hence the epilepti c behavior of their gest iculating or swooning 
personages, and hence, also, their failure to find an adequa te artistic expression for the mystical experience. This 
failure seems all the more surprising when one remember s that their period witnesse d a great efflorescence of 
mystical religion. It was the age of St . John of the Cross and Benet of Ca nfield, of Mme. Acarie and Father 
Lallemant and Charles de Condren, of Augustine Baker and Surin and Olier. 
 All these had taught that the end of the spiritual life is the unitive knowledge of God, an immediate intuition 
of Him beyond discursive reason, beyond imagination, beyond emotion. And all had insisted  that visions, raptures 
and miracles were not the "real thi ng," but mere by-products which, if ta ken too seriously, could become fatal 
impediments to spiritual progress. But visions, raptures  and miracles are astounding and picturesque occurrences; 
and astounding and picturesque occurrences were the predestined subject matte r of artists whose concern was with 
the inordinate. In Baroque art the mystic is represented either as a psychic with s upernormal powers, or as an 
ecstatic, who passes out of history in or der to be alone, not w ith God, but with his or her physiology in a state 
hardly distinguishable from that of sexual enjoyment. And th is in spite of what all the contemporary masters of the 
spiritual life were saying about the dangers of precisely this sort of thing. 
 Such a misinterpretation of mystic ism was made inevitable by the very nature of Baroque art. Given the 
style in which they worked, the artist s of the seventeenth century could not have treated the theme in any other 
way. And, oddly enough even at times when the current styl e permitted a treatment of the less epileptic aspects of

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

108
religion, no fully adequate rendering of the contemplative life was ever achieved in the plastic arts of Christendom. 
The peace that passes all understanding was often sung and spoken; it was hardly ever painted or carved. Thus, in 
the writings of St. Bernard, of Albertus Magnus, of Eckhart and Tauler and Ruysbroeck one may find passages that 
express very clearly the natu re and significance of mysti cal contemplation. But the sain ts who figure in medieval 
painting and sculpture tell us next to nothing about this anticipation of the beatific vision. There are no equivalents 
of those Far Eastern Buddhas and Bodhisattvas who incarnate , in stone and paint, the experience of ultimate 
reality. Moreover the Christia n saints have their being in a world fr om which non-human Nature (that mine of 
supernatural beauties and transcende nt significances) has been almost completely excluded. In his handbook on 
painting Cennini gives a recipe for mountains. Take some large jagged stones, arrange them on a table, draw them 
and, lo and behold, you will have a range of Alps or Apennines good enough for all the practical purposes of art. In 
China and Japan mountains were taken more seriously. Th e aspiring artist was advised to go and live among them, 
to make himself alertly passive in th eir presence, to contemplate them lovingly until he could understand the mode 
of their being and feel within them  the workings of the immanent and transcendent Tao. As one might have 
expected, the medieval artist s of Christendom painted mere backgrounds,  whereas those of the Far East painted 
landscapes that are the equivalent of mystical poetry -- formally perfect renderings of man's experience of being 
related to the Order of Things. 
 This experience is, of course, perfectly private, non-hi storical and unsocial. That is why, to the organizers 
of churches and the exponents of salv ation through the State, it has always s eemed to be suspect, shady and even 
indecent. And yet, like sex and pain and death, there it rema ins, one of the brute facts with which, whether we like 
them or not, we have to come to terms. Maddeningly, un bearably, an occasional artist rubs our noses in his 
rendering of these facts. Confronted by the pornogra phies of suffering, of sensuality, of dissolution, by The 
Disasters of War and The Naked and the Dead, by Tropic of Cancer, by Ivan llyitch and even (despite their 
ludicrous sublimity) by the Baroque tomb s, we shrink and are appalled. And in another way there is something 
hardly less appalling in th e pornographies (as many good rationalists regard them) of mysticism. Even the 
consolations of religion and philosophy are pretty deso lating for the average sensual man, who clings to his 
ignorance as the sole guarantee of happiness. Terribilis mors conturbat me; but so does terribilis Vita. 
(From Themes and Variations) 
 
 
 
Faith, Taste, and History 
 
 Among tall stories, surely one of  the tallest is the history of Mo rmonism. A founder whose obviously 
homemade revelations were accepted as more-than-gosp el truth by thousands of followers; a lieutenant and 
successor who was "for daring a Cromwell,  for intrigue a Machiavelli, for ex ecutive force a Moses, and for utter 
lack of conscience a Bonaparte"; a body of doctrine combining the most pe netrating psychological insights with 
preposterous history and absurd me taphysics; a society of puritanical but  theater-going and music-loving po-
lygamists; a chuch once condemned by the Supreme Cour t as an organized rebel lion, but now a monolith of 
respectability; a passionately loyal membership distinguis hed, even in these middle years of the twentieth century, 
by the old-fashioned Protestant and pi oneering virtues of self-reliance and mu tual aid -- together, these make up a 
tale which no self-respecting reader even of Spillane, even of science fiction, should be asked to swallow. And yet, 
in spite of its total lack of plausibility, the tale happens to be true. 
 My book knowledge of its truth had been acquired long si nce and intermittently kept up to date. It was not, 
however, until the spring of 1953 that I had occasion actua lly to see and touch the c oncrete evidences of that 
strange history. 
 We had driven all day in torrential rain, sometimes  even in untimely snow, across Nevada. Hour after hour 
in the vast blankness of desert plains, past black bald mountains that suddenly closed in through the driving rain, to 
recede again, after a score of wintry miles, into the gray distance. 
 At the state line the weather had cl eared for a little, and there below us, unearthly in a momentary gleam of 
sunshine, lay the Great Salt De sert of Utah, snow-white be tween the nearer crags, with  the line of blue or inky 
peaks rising, far off, from the opposite shore of that dry ghost of an inland sea.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

109
 There was another storm as we entered Salt Lake C ity, and it was through sheets of falling water that we 
caught our first glimpse, above the chestnut trees, of a flood-lit object quite as difficult to believe in, despite the 
evidence of our senses, as the strange history it commemorates. 
 The improbability of this greatest  of the Mormon Temples does not cons ist in its astounding ugliness. Most 
Victorian churches are astoundingly  ugly. It consists in a certain combination of oddity, dullness and 
monumentality unique, so far as I know, in the annals of architecture. 
 For the most part Victorian buildings are more or less learned pastiches of so mething else -- something 
Gothic, something Greek or nobly Roman, something E lizabethan or Flamboyant Flemish or even vaguely 
Oriental. But this Temple looks like  nothing on earth -- looks like nothi ng on earth and yet contrives to be 
completely unoriginal, utterly and uniformly prosaic. 
 But whereas most of the churches built during the past century are gimcrack affairs of brick veneered with 
imitation stone, of lattice work plastered to look like ma sonry, this vast essay in eccen tric dreariness was realized, 
from crypt to capstone, in the solidest of granite. Its foundations are cyclopean, its walls are three yards thick. Like 
the Escorial, like the Great Pyramid, it was built to last inde finitely. Long after the rest of Victorian and twentieth-
century architecture shall have crumbled back to dust, this  thing will be standing in the Western desert, an object, 
to the neo-neolithic savages of post-atomic times, of uncomprehending reverence and superstitious alarm. 
 To what extent are the arts conditioned by, or indebted  to, religion? And is there,  at any given moment of 
history, a common socio-psychological sour ce that gives to the various arts -- music and painting, architecture and 
sculpture -- some kind of common tendenc y? What I saw that night in Temple Square and what I heard next day 
during an organ recital in the Tabern acle, brought up the old problem in a new and, in many ways, enlightening 
context. 
 Here, in the floodlights, was the most grandiose by far of  all Western cathedrals. This Chartres of the desert 
was begun and largely built under economic and social conditions hardly disti nguishable from those prevailing in 
France or England in the tenth century. In 1853, when the Temple's foundation stone was laid, London could boast 
its Crystal Palace, could look back complacently on its E xhibition of the marvels of Early Victorian technology. 
But here in Utah men were still li ving in the Dark Ages -- without roads, without towns, with no means of 
communication faster than the ox wagon or  mule train, without industry, without machin es, without tools more 
elaborate than saws and scythes and hammers -- and with precious few even of those. The granite blocks of which 
the Temple is built were quarried by  man power, dressed by man power, haul ed over twenty miles of trackless 
desert by man power and ox power, hoisted  into position by man power. Like the cathedrals of medieval Europe 
the Temple is a monument, among other things, to the strength and heroic endurance of striped muscle. 
 In the Spanish colonies, as in the American South, st riped muscle was activated by the whip. But here in the 
West there were no African slaves and no local supply of domesticable aborigines. Whatever the settlers wanted to 
do had to be done by their own hands. The ordinary run of  settlers wanted only houses and mills and mines and (if 
the nuggets were large enough) Paris fa shions imported at immense expense around the Horn. But these Mormons 
wanted something more -- a granite Temple of indestructib le solidity. Within a few years of their arrival in Utah 
they set to work. There were no whips to stimulate their muscles, only faith -- but in what ab undance! It was the 
kind of mountain-moving faith that gives men power to achieve the impossible and bear the intolerable, the kind of 
faith for which men die and kill and work themselves be yond the limits of human capacity, the kind of faith that 
had launched the Crusades and raised the towers of A ngkor-Vat. Once again it perfor med its historic miracle. 
Against enormous odds, a great cathedral was built in the wilderness. Alas, in stead of Bourges or Canterbury, it 
was This. 
 Faith, it is evident, may be relied on to produce sust ained action and, more rarely, sustained contemplation. 
There is, however, no guarantee that it will produce good art. Re ligion is always a patron of the arts, but its taste is 
by no means impeccable. Religious art is sometimes excelle nt, sometimes atrocious; and the excellence is not 
necessarily associated with fervor nor  the atrocity with lukewarmness. Thus , at the turn of our era, Buddhism 
nourished in Northwestern India. Piety, to judge by the large number of surviving monuments, ran high; but artistic 
merit ran pretty low. Or consider Hindu art. For the last three centuries it has been astonishingly feeble. Have the 
many varieties of Hinduism been taken less seriously than in  the times when Indian art was in its glory? There is 
not the slightest reason to believe it. Similarly there is not  the slightest reason to believe that Catholic fervor was 
less intense in the age of the Mannerist s than it had been three generations earlier. On th e contrary, there is good

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

110
reason to believe that, during the Counter-Reformation, Catholicism was taken more seriously by more people than 
at any time since the fourteenth century. But the ba d Catholicism of the High Renaissance produced superb 
religious art; the good Catholicism of the later sixteenth a nd seventeenth centuries produced  a great deal of rather 
bad religious art. Turning now to the indi vidual artist -- and after all, there is  no such thing as "Art," there are only 
men at work -- we find that the crea tors of religious masterpieces are sometimes, like Fra Angelico, extremely 
devout, sometimes no more than conve ntionally orthodox, some times (like Perugino, the supreme exponent of 
pietism in art) active and open disbelievers. 
 For the artist in his professional capacity, religion is im portant because it offers hi m a wealth of interesting 
subject matter and many opportunities to exercise his skill. Upon the quality of his producti on it has little or no 
influence. The excellence of a work of religious art depe nds on two factors, neither of  which has anything to do 
with religion. It depends primarily on the presence in the artist of certain tendencies, sensibilities and talents; and, 
secondarily, it depends on the earlier history of his chosen art, and on what may be called the logic of its formal 
relations. At any given moment that internal logic points toward conclusions beyond those which have been 
reached by the majority of contemporary artists. A recognition of this fact may impel certain artists -- especially 
young artists -- to try to realize those possible conclusions in concrete actuality. Sometimes these attempts are fully 
successful; sometimes, in spite of their author's talents, they fail. In either case, the outcome does not depend on the 
nature of the artist's metaphysical beliefs, nor on the warmth with which he entertains them. 
 The Mormons had faith, and their faith enabled them to realize a prodigious ideal -- the building of a 
Temple in the wilderness. But though faith can move mountains,  it cannot of itself shap e those mountains into 
cathedrals. It will activate muscle, but has no power to create architectural talent where none exists. Still less can it 
alter the facts of artistic history and the internal logic of forms. 
 For a great variety of reasons, some  sociological and some intrinsically aesthetic, some easily discernible 
and others obscure, the traditions of the European arts and crafts had disintegrated, by the middle years of the 
nineteenth century, into a chaos of fertile bad taste and ubiquitous vulgarity. In their fervor, in the intensity of their 
concern with metaphysical problems, in their readiness to embrace the most eccentric beliefs and practices, the 
Mormons, like their contemporaries in a hundred Christian, Socialist or Spiritualist co mmunities, belonged to the 
Age of the Gnostics. In everything else they were typical products of rustic nineteenth-century America. And in the 
field of the plastic arts nineteenth-century America, especially rustic America, was worse off even than nineteenth-
century Europe. Barry's Houses of Parliament were as much beyond these Temple-builders as Bourges or 
Canterbury. 
 Next morning, in the enormous wooden tabernacle, we listened to the daily orga n recital. There was some 
Bach and a piece by César Franck and finally some improvised variations on a hymn tune. These last reminded one 
irresistibly of the good old da ys of the silent screen -- the days whe n, in a solemn hush and under spotlights, the 
tail-coated organist at the console of his Wurlitzer would rise majestically from the cellarage, would turn and bend 
his swanlike loins in acknowledgment of  the applause, would resume his seat  and slowly extend his white hands. 
Silence, and then boom! the picture palace was f illed with the enormous snoring of thirty-two-foot 
contratrombones and bombardes. And after the snoring would come the "Londonderry Air" on the vox Humana, "A 
Little Grey Home in the West" on the vox angelica, and perhaps (what bliss!) "The End of a Perfect Day" on the 
vox treacliana, the vox bedroomica, the vox unementionabilis. 
 How strange, I found myself reflecting, as the glu tinous tide washed over me, how strange that people 
should listen with apparently equal enjoyment to this kind of thing and the Prelude and Fugue in E-flat Major. Or 
had I got hold of the wrong end of the stick? Perhaps mine was the strange , the essentially abnormal attitude. 
Perhaps there was something wrong with a listener who found it difficult to adore both these warblings around a 
hymn tune and the Prelude and Fugue. 
 From these unanswerable questions my mind wandered to others, hardly less puzzling, in the domain of 
history. Here was this huge instrument. In its original and already monumental state, it was a product of pioneering 
faith. An Australian musician and earl y Mormon convert, Joseph Ridges, had furnished the design and supervised 
the work. The timber used for making the pipes was hauled  by oxen from forests three hundred miles to the south. 
The intricate machinery of a great organ was home-made by  local craftsmen. When th e work was finished, what 
kind of music, one wonders, was played to the Latter-day Sa ints assembled in the tabernacle? Hymns, of course, in 
profusion. But also Handel, also Haydn and Mozart, also Mendelssohn and perhaps even a few pieces by that queer

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

111
old fellow whom Mendelssohn had resurrected, John Sebastian Bach. 
 It is one of the paradoxes of history that the pe ople who built the monstrosities of the Victorian epoch 
should have been the same as the people who applauded, in their hideous halls and churches, such masterpieces of 
orderliness and unaffected grandeur as The Messiah, and who preferred to all his contemporaries that most 
elegantly classical of the moderns, Felix Mendelssohn. Popular taste in one field may be more or less completely at 
variance with popular taste outs ide that field. Still more su rprisingly, the fundamental te ndencies of professionals 
in one of the arts may be at variance with the fundamental tendencies of professionals in other arts. 
 Until very recently the music of the fifteenth, sixtee nth and early seventeenth centuries was, to all but 
learned specialists, almost completely unknown. Now, thanks to long-playi ng phonograph records, more and more 
of this buried treasure is coming to th e surface. The interested amateur is at last in a position to hear for himself 
what, before, he could only read a bout. He knows, for example, what people were singing when Botticelli was 
painting "Venus and Mars"; what Van Eyck might have  heard in the way of love  songs and polyphonic masses; 
what kind of music was being sung or played in St. Mark's while Tintoretto and Veronese were at work, next door, 
in the Doge's Palace; what developments were taking place  in the sister art during the more than sixty years of 
Bernini's career as sculptor and architect. 
 Dunstable and Dufay, Ockeghem and Josquin, Lassus, Palestrina, Victoria -- their overlapping lives cover 
the whole of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Music,  in those two centuries, un derwent momentous changes. 
The dissonances of the earlier, Gothic  polyphony were reduced to universal c onsonance; the various artifices -- 
imitation, diminution, augmentation and the rest -- were pe rfected and, by the greater masters, used to create 
rhythmical patterns of incred ible subtlety and richness. But through the whole period virtually all serious music 
retained those open-ended, free-floating forms which it had inherited from the Gregorian Chant and, more 
remotely, from some Oriental ancestor. European folk mu sic was symmetrical, four-square, with regular returns to 
the same starting point and balanced phrases, as in me trical poetry, of pre-establ ished and foreseeable length. 
Based upon plain chant and written, for th e part, as a setting to the liturgical  texts, learned music was analogous, 
not to scanned verse, but to prose. It was a music without bars -- that is to say, with no regularity of emphasis. Its 
component elements were of different lengths, there we re no returns to recognizable starting points, and its 
geometrical analogue was not some closed figure like the sq uare or circle, but an open curve undulating away to 
infinity. That such a music ever reached a close was due, not to  the internal logic of its forms, but solely to the fact 
that even the longest liturgical texts come at last to their Amen. Some attempt to supply a purely musical reason for 
not going on forever was made by those composers who wrote their masses around a cantus firmus-- a melody 
borrowed, almost invariably, from the closed, symmetrical music of popular songs. Sung or played in very slow 
time, and hidden in the tenor, sometimes even in the bass, the cantus firmus was, for all practical purposes, 
inaudible. It existed for the benefit, not of listeners, but of the composer; not to remind bored church-goers of what 
they had heard last night in the tavern, but to se rve a strictly artistic purpose. Even when the cantus firmus was 
present, the general effect of unconditio ned, free-floating continuousness persisted. But, for the composer, the task 
of organization had been made easier; for, buried within the fl uid heart of the music, was the unbending armature 
of a fully metrical song. 
 While Dufay was still a choir boy at  Cambrai, Ghiberti was at work on the bronze doors of Santa Maria del 
Fiore, the young Donatello had been give n his first commissions. And when Vict oria, the last and greatest of the 
Roman masters, died in 1613, Lorenzo Be rnini was already a fullblown infant  prodigy. From Early Renaissance to 
Baroque, the fundamental tendency of  the plastic arts was through symmetry and beyond it, away from closed 
forms toward unbalanced openness and the implication of  infinity. In music, during this same period, the 
fundamental tendency was through ope nness and beyond it, away from floa ting continuousness toward meter, 
toward four-square symmetry, toward regular and foreseea ble recurrence. It was in Venice that the two opposite 
tendencies, of painting and of music,  first became conspicuous. While Tint oretto and Veronese moved toward 
openness and the asymmetrical, the two Gabrielis moved, in their motets and their instrumental music, toward 
harmony, toward regular scansion and the closed form. In Ro me, Palestrina and Victoria continued to work in the 
old free-floating style. At St. Mark's, th e music of the future -- the music which in due course was to develop into 
the music of Purcell and Couperin, of  Bach and Handel -- was in process of  being born. By the sixteen-thirties, 
when even sculpture had taken wing for the infinite, Bern ini's older contemporary, Heinrich Schuetz, the pupil of 
Giovanni Gabrieli, was writing (not al ways, but every now and then) symmetr ical music that sounds almost like

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

112
Bach. 
 For some odd reason this kind of mu sic has recently been labeled "baroque." The choice of this nickname is 
surely unfortunate. If Bernini and his Italian, German and Austrian follower s are baroque artists (and they have 
been so designated for many years), then there is no justific ation, except in the fact that they happened to be living 
at the same time, for applying the same epithet to composers, whose fundamental tendencies in regard to form were 
radically different from theirs. 
 About the only seventeenth-centur y composer to whom the term "baroque" can be applied in the same 
sense as we apply it to Bernini, is Claudio Monteverdi. In  his operas and his religious mu sic, there are passages in 
which Monteverdi combines the ope nness and boundlessness of the older polyphony with a new expressiveness. 
The feat is achieved by setting an unconditionally soaring melody to an accompaniment, not of other voices, but of 
variously colored chords. The so-called baroque composers are baroque (in th e established sense of the word) only 
in their desire for a more direct and dramatic expressi on of feeling. To realize this desire, they developed 
modulation within a fully tonal syst em, they exchanged polyphony for harmony, they varied the tempo of their 
music and the volume of its sound, and they invented mode rn orchestration. In this c oncern with expressiveness 
they were akin to their contemporaries in the fields of painting and sculpture. But in their desire for squareness, 
closedness and symmetry they were pol es apart from men whose first wish  was to overthrow the tyranny of 
centrality, to break out of the cramping frame or niche, to transcend the merely finite and the all too human. 
 Between 1598 and 1680 -- the years of Bernini's birth and death -- baroque painting and sculpture moved in 
one direction, baroque music, as it is  miscalled, moved in another, almost opposite direction. The only conclusion 
we can draw is that the internal logic and the recent hist ory of the art in which a man is working exercise a more 
powerful influence upon him than do the social, religious and political events of the time in which he lives. 
Fifteenth-century sculptors and painte rs inherited a tradition of symmetry  and closedness. Fifteenth-century 
composers inherited a tradition of openness and asymmetry. On either side the intrin sic logic of the forms was 
worked out to its ultimate conclusion. By the end of the sixteenth century neither the musical nor the plastic artists 
could go any further along the roads they had been follo wing. Going beyond themselves, the painters and sculptors 
pursued the path of open-e nded asymmetry, the free-floating musicians turned to the exploration of regular 
recurrence and the closed form. Meanwh ile the usual wars and persecutions a nd sectarian throat-cuttings were in 
full swing; there were economic revol utions, political and social revolu tions, revolutions in science and 
technology. But these merely hist orical events seem to have  affected artists only materi ally -- by ruining them or 
making their fortunes, by giving or w ithholding the opportunity to  display their skill, by changing the social or 
religious status of potential patrons. Their thought and fee ling, their fundamental artistic tendencies were reactions 
to events of a totally differe nt order -- events not  in the social world, but in th e special universe of each man's 
chosen art. 
 Take Schuetz, for example. Most of his adult life wa s spent in running away from the recurrent horrors of 
the Thirty Years' War. But the changes and chances of  a discontinuous existence left no corresponding traces upon 
his work. Whether at Dresden or in It aly, in Denmark or at Dresden again, he went on drawing the artistically 
logical conclusions from the premises formulated under Gabrieli at Venice and gradually modified, through the 
years, by his own successive achievements and the achievements of his contemporaries and juniors. 
 Man is a whole, but a whole with  an astounding capacity fo r living, simultaneously or successively, in 
water-tight compartments. What happens here has little or no effect on what happens there. The seventeenth-
century taste for closed forms in music was inconsistent  with the seventeenth-century taste for asymmetry and 
openness in the plastic arts. The Victor ian taste for Mendelssohn and Handel wa s inconsistent with the Victorian 
taste for Mormon Temples, Albert Halls and St. Pancras Ra ilway Stations. But in fact these mutually exclusive 
tastes coexisted and had no perceptible effect on one anot her. Consistency is a verbal criterion, which cannot be 
applied to the phenomena of life. Taken together, the various activities of a single individual may "make no sense," 
and yet be perfectly compatible with biological survival, social success and personal happiness. 
 Objective time is the same for every member of a human group and, within each individual, for each 
inhabitant of a watertight compartment. But the self in one compartment does not necessarily have the same 
Zeitgeist as the selves in other compartments or as the selves in whom other i ndividuals do their equally 
inconsistent living. When the stresses of history are at a maximum, men and women tend to react to them in the 
same way. For example, if their country is involved in wa r, most individuals become heroic and self-sacrificing.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

113
And if the war produces famine and pest ilence, most of them die. But wher e the historical pressures are more 
moderate, individuals are at liberty, within rather wide li mits, to react to them in different ways. We are always 
synchronous with ourselves and others; but it often happens that we are not contemporary with either. 
 At Logan, for example, in the shadow of another Temp le, whose battlemented turrets gave it the air of an 
Early Victorian "folly," of a backdrop to Edmund Kean in Richard III, we got into conversa tion with a charming 
contemporary, not of Harry Emerson Fo sdick or Bishop Barnes, but of Brot her Juniper -- a Mormon whose faith 
had all the fervor, all the unqualif ied literalness, of peasant faith in the thirteenth century. He talked to us at length 
about the weekly baptisms of the dead. Fifteen hundred of them baptized by proxy every Saturday evening and 
thus, at long last, admitted to that heaven where all the family ties persis t throughout the aeons. To a member of a 
generation brought up on Freud, these posthumous prospects s eemed a bit forbidding. Not so to Brother Juniper. 
He spoke of them with a kind of quiet rapture. And how  celestially beautiful , in his eyes, was this cyclopean 
gazebo! How inestimable the privilege, which he had earn ed, of being allowed to pa ss through its doors! Doors 
forever closed to all Gentiles and even  to a moiety of the Latter-day Sain ts. Around that heavenly Temple the lilac 
trees were in full scent and the mountains that ringed the fertile valley were white with the snowy symbol of divine 
purity. But time pressed. We left Brother Juniper to his paradise and drove on. 
 That evening, in the tiny Natural History Museum at  Idaho Falls, we found ourselv es talking to two people 
from a far remoter past -- a fascinating couple straight out of a cave. Not one of your fancy Magdalenian caves 
with all that modernistic art work  on the walls. No, no -- a good old-fashi oned, down-to-earth cave belonging to 
nice ordinary people three thousand gene rations before the invention of pain ting. These were Australopiths, whose 
reaction to the stuffed grizzly was a remark about sizzli ng steaks of bear meat; these were early Neanderthalers 
who could not see a fish or bird or four-footed beast without immediately dreaming of slaughter and a guzzle. 
 "Boy!" said the cave lady, as we st ood with them before the solemn, clergyman-like head of an enormous 
moose. "Would he be good with onions!" 
 It was fortunate, I reflected, that we  were so very thin, they so remark ably well fed and therefore, for the 
moment, so amiable. 
(From Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

114
SECTION III 
 
 
HISTORY 
 
 
Maine de Biran: The Philosopher in History 
 
 Systematic knowledge of historical trends and "waves of the future" is  sought only by the in tellectual few. 
But every individual lives here and now, and is more or less profoundly affected by the f act that now is not then, 
nor here somewhere else. What are, a nd what should be, the relations between  the personal and the historical, the 
existential and the social? Our philosopher, Maine de Biran never posed this question in so many words; 
consequently we have to infer his answers from what he says in other contexts. What he seems to suggest, 
throughout the Journal Intime, is that the individual's relation to history and society is normally that of victim to 
monster. This being so, every reasonab le person should try, so far as he can, to escape from history -- but into 
what? Into abstract thought and the inner life, or else (and this was the conclusion reached by our philosopher 
toward the end of his career) into the loving contemplation of the divine Spirit. 
 The problem is so important that it  deserves a more thorough examinati on than Biran chose to give it. Let 
us begin with an analogy drawn from inanimate matter. Th e laws of gases are concerne d with the interdependence 
of volume, pressure and temperature. But the individual molecules of whic h the gas is composed have neither 
temperature nor pressure, but only ki netic energy and a tendency to random movement. In a word, the laws of 
single molecules are entirely different from the laws of the gases they constitute. Something of the same kind is 
true of individuals and societies. In  groups consisting of large numbers of human individuals, ce rtain regularities 
can be detected and certain sociological laws can be fo rmulated. Because of the relatively small size of even the 
most considerable human groups, and because of the enormous differences, congenital and acquired, between 
individual and individual, these regularities have numerous exceptions and these sociological laws are rather 
inexact. But this is no reason for dismissing them. For, in the words of Edgar Zilser, from whose essay on "The 
Problems of Empiricism" I have borrowed this simile of molecules and gases, "no ph ysicist or astronomer would 
disregard a regularity on the ground that it did not always hold." 
 For our purposes the important thi ng about the sociological laws is not their inexactness but the fact that 
they are quite different from the psychological and physio logical laws which govern the individual person. "If," 
says Zilser, "we look for social regularities by means of empathy" -- feeling ourselves into a situation by imagining 
what would be our own behavior  in regard to it -- "we ma y never find them, since idea s, wishes and actions might 
not appear in them at all." In a word, changes in quantit y, if sufficiently great, resu lt in changes in kind. Between 
the individual and the social, the personal and the historical, there is a difference amounting to incommensurability. 
Nobody now reads Herbert Spencer's Man Versus the State. And yet the conflict between what is good for a 
psycho-physical person and what is good for an organization wholly innocent of feelings, wishes and ideas is real 
and seems destined to remain forever unresolved. One of the many reasons for the bewildering and tragic character 
of human existence is the fact that social organization is  at once necessary and fatal. Men are forever creating such 
organizations for their own convenience and forever finding  themselves the victims of  their homemade monsters. 
History reveals the Church and the St ate as a pair of indispensable Molo chs. They protect their worshiping 
subjects, only to enslave and destroy them. The relations between social organizations and the individuals who live 
under them is symbolically expressed by the word "shepherd," as applied to the priests and rulers, who like to think 
of themselves as God's earthly repr esentatives, and even to God Himself.  The metaphor is of high, but not the 
highest, antiquity; for it was first us ed by the herd-owning, land-destroying, meat-eating and war-waging peoples 
who replaced the horticulturists of the first civilization and put an end to that Golden Age of Peace, which not long 
since was regarded as a mere myth but is now revealed by the light of archaeology as a proto- and pre-historical 
reality. By force of unreflecting habit we go on talking sentimentally about the Shepherd of his people, about 
Pastors and their flocks, about stray la mbs and a Good Shepherd. We never pause to reflect that a shepherd is "not 
in business for his health," still less fo r the health of his sheep. If he takes good care of the animals, it is in order 
that he may rob them of their wool a nd milk, castrate their male offspring a nd finally cut their throats and convert

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

115
them into mutton. Applied to most of the States and Churches  of the last two or three t housand years, this pastoral 
metaphor is seen to be exceedingly apt -- so apt, indeed, that one wonders why the civ il and ecclesiastical herders 
of men should ever have allowed it to gain currency. From  the point of view of the individual lambs, rams and 
ewes there is, of course, no such thing as a good shepherd; their problem is to find means whereby they may enjoy 
the benefits of a well-ordered social life without being e xposed to the shearings, milki ngs, geldings and butcheries 
which have always been associated with  the pastoral office. To discuss thos e means would lead us too far afield. 
Let it suffice to say that, given, first, the manifest unfitne ss of almost all human beings to exercise much power for 
very long, and, second, the tendency for social institutions to become pseudo-divine ends, to which individual men 
and women are merely means, it follows that every gran t of authority should be he dged about with effective 
reservations; that political, economic and religious organizations should be small and co-operative, never large, and 
therefore inhuman and hierarchical; that the centralization of economic and political power should be avoided at all 
costs; and that nations and groups of nations should be organized as federations of local and professional bodies, 
having wide powers of self-government. At the present time,  unfortunately, all signs poi nt, not to de centralization 
and the abolition of man-herders, but rather to a steady increase in the power of the Big Shepherd and his oligarchy 
of bureaucratic dogs, to a growth in the size, the complexity, the machine-lik e efficiency and rigidity of social 
organizations, and to a comple ter deification of the State, accompanied by a completer reificat ion, or reduction to 
thing-hood, of individual persons. 
 Maine de Biran's temperament was such that, even when he found himself on the winning side, even when -
- as Quaestor of the Chamber under Louis XVIII -- he was an official personage  of some importance, he continued 
to regard the social and the historical with the same apprehensive dislike as he  had felt toward them in the days of 
Bonaparte and the Jacobins. In his diary the longing to es cape from his pigeonhole in the social hierarchy, to break 
out of contemporary history and return to  a purely private life, is  expressed almost as fre quently as the longing to 
be delivered from the body of this death. And yet he rema ined to the end embedded in politics and chained to his 
legislative functions. Why? To begin with, our philosophe r was far from rich and found it very hard, without his 
official salary, to make both ends meet. Next there was his sense of duty. He felt morally obliged to do all he could 
for the royal house and for his rustic neighbors in Périgord. And finally ther e was his very unphilosophical desire 
to seem important, to be a person age among the pompous personages of the great world. Groaning and reluctant, 
yet perennially hopeful of the miracle that should tran sform him from a tongue-tied intr overt into the brilliant and 
commanding herder of men, he went on clinging to his barbed perch among the great. It was death, and not his own 
will, that finally relaxed that agonizing clutch. 
 Fortunately for Biran, his martyrdom was not conti nuous. Even at moments when history pressed upon him 
most alarmingly, he found it possible to take a complete holiday in abstract thought. Sometimes he did not even 
have to take his holiday; it came to him, spontaneously, gratuit ously, in the form of an illumination or a kind of 
ecstasy. Thus, to our philosopher, the spring of 1794 was me morable not for the executions of Hébert and Danton, 
not because Robespierre had now dedicated the Terror to the greater glory of the Supreme Being, but on account of 
an event that had nothing whatever to do with history or the social environment. "Today, the 27th of May, I had an 
experience too beautiful, too remarkable  by its rarity ever to be forgotten. I was walking by myself a few minutes 
before sundown. The weather was perfect; spring was at it s freshest and most bri lliant; the whole world was 
clothed in that charm which can be felt by the soul, but not described in words. All that struck my senses filled my 
heart with a mysterious, sad sweetness.  The tears stood in my eyes. Ravishme nt succeeded ravishment. If I could 
perpetuate this state, what would be lacking to my felicity? I should have found upon this earth the joys of heaven." 
 During the Hundred Days Biran was a good deal closer to history, than he had been at his ancestral estate of 
Grateloup in 1794. Every event that occu rred between the return from Elba and Waterloo filled him with a bitter 
indignation. "I am no longer kind, for men exasperate me . I can now see only criminals and cowards. Pity for 
misfortune, the need to be useful a nd to serve my fellows, the desire to relieve distress, all the expansive and 
generous sentiments which were, up till now, my principles of action, are suffering a daily diminution in my heart." 
 Such are the ordinary psychological c onsequences of violent events on the historical level. Individuals react 
to these events with a chronic unch aritableness punctuated by paroxysms of hate, rage and fear. Happily, in the 
long run, malice is always self -destructive. If it were not, this earth would be, not a Mi ddle World of inextricably 
mingled good and evil, but plain, unmitigated Hell. In th e short run, however, the wa r-born uncharitableness of 
many individuals constitutes a public opinion in favor of yet more collective violence.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

116
 In Biran's case the bitterness with which he reacted to contemporary history filled only his heart. "My mind, 
meanwhile, is occupied with abstract speculations, foreign to all the interests of this world. The speculations keep 
me from thinking about my fellow men -- and this is fortunate; for I cannot think of them except to hate and 
despise." 
 The life of every individual occupies a certain position in time, is contemporary with certain political events 
and runs parallel, so to speak, with  certain social and cultural movement s. In a word, the individual lives 
surrounded by history. But to what extent does he actually live in history? And what precise ly is this history by 
which individuals are surrounded and within which each of them does at least some of his living? 
 Let us begin by considering the second of these two questions: What is history? Is history something which 
exists, in its intelligib le perfection, only in the minds of historians ? Or is it something actually experienced by the 
men and women who are born into time, live out their lives, die and are succeeded by their sons and daughters? 
 Mr. Toynbee puts the question somewhat differently: "W hat," he asks, "will be si ngled out as the salient 
event of our time by future historians? No t, I fancy, any of those sensational or  tragic or catastrophic political and 
economic events which occupy the headlines of our newspapers and the foregrounds of our minds," but rather, "the 
impact of Western Civilization upon all the other socie ties of the world," followed by the reaction (already 
perceptible) of those other civiliza tions upon Western Civili zation and the ultimate emergence of a religion 
affirming "the unity of mankind." This is an answer to our question as well as to Mr. Toynbee's. For, obviously, the 
processes he describes are not a part of anybody's immediate experience. Nobody now living is intimately aware of 
them; nobody feels that they are happening to himself or sees them happening to his children or his friends. But the 
(to a philosophical historian) unimportant tragedies and ca tastrophes, which fill the head lines, actually happen to 
some people, and their repercussions are part of the experience of almost everybody. If the philosophical historians 
are right, everything of real importan ce in history is a matter of very long durations and very large numbers. 
Between these and any given person, livi ng at any given moment of time, lie the events predominantly "tragic or 
catastrophic" which are the subject matter of unphilosophical history. Some of these events can become part of the 
immediate experience of persons, and, conversely, some pe rsons can to some extent modify the tragedies and 
control the catastrophes. Inasmuch as they involve fairly large numbers and fairly long durations, such events are a 
part of history. But from the philosophical  historian's point of view they are im portant only in so fa r as they are at 
once the symptoms of a pr ocess involving much greater numbers and longer durations, and the means to the 
realization of that process. Indivi duals can never actually e xperience the long-range proc ess which, according to 
the philosophical historians, gives mean ing to history. All that they can expe rience (and this experience is largely 
subconscious) is the circumambient cu lture. And should they be intellectually  curious, they can discover, through 
appropriate reading, that the culture by which they are su rrounded is different in certai n respects from the culture 
which surrounded their ancestors . Between one state of a culture and anot her later state there is not, and there 
cannot be, a continuity of experience. Ev ery individual simply finds himself wher e in fact he is -- here, not there; 
now, not then. Necessarily ignorant of the meaningful pro cesses of long-range history, he has to make the best of 
that particular tract of short-range tragedy and catastrophe, that particular section of a cultural curve, against which 
his own personal life traces its organic pattern of youth, maturity and decay. On ce again, it is a case of the gas and 
its constituent molecules. Gas laws are not the same as the laws governing the particle s within the gas. Though he 
himself must act, suffer and enjoy as a molecule, the philo sophical historian does his best  to think as a gas -- or 
rather (since a society is incapable of  thought) as the detached obs erver of a gas. It is, of course, easy enough to 
take the gaseous view of a period other than one's own. It is much more diffi cult to take it in regard to the time 
during which one is oneself a molecule within the social ga s. That is why a modern historian feels himself justified 
in revising the estimates of their own time made by the aut hors of his documents -- in correcting, for example, the 
too unfavorable view of the age of Aquinas and the cathed ral-builders taken by all thirteenth-century moralists, or 
the too favorable view of industrial civilization taken by many Victorian moralists. 
 History as something experienced can never be fully recorded. For, obviously, there are as many such 
histories as there have been experi encing human beings. The nearest appro ach to a general history-as-something-
experienced would be an anthology of  a great variety of personal documen ts. Professor Coulton has compiled a 
number of excellent anthologies of this kind covering the medieval peri od. They should be read by anyone who 
wants to know, not what modern histor ians think about the Middle Ages, but wh at it actually felt like to be a 
contemporary of St. Francis, or Dante, or Chaucer.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

117
 History-as-something-expe rienced being unwritable, we must pe rforce be content with history-as-
something-in-the-minds-of-historians. This last is of  two kinds: the short-range history of tragedies and 
catastrophes, political ups and downs, social and economi c revolutions; and the long-range, philosophical history 
of those very long durations and very large numbers in which it is possible to observe  meaningful regularities, 
recurrent and developing patt erns. No two philosophical hi storians discover precisely the same regularities or 
meanings; and even among the writers of the other kind of history there is disagreement in regard to the importance 
of the part played by individuals in the short-range political and economic movements which are their chosen 
subject matter. These divergences of opinion are unfortunate but, in view of our present ignorance, inevitable. 
 We may now return to the first of our two questi ons: To what extent does the individual, who lives 
surrounded by history, actually live in hi story? How much is his existence c onditioned by the soci ologists' trinity 
of Place, Work and Folk? How is he related to the circumambient culture? In what ways is his molecular 
personality affected by the general state of the social gas and his own position within it? The answer, it is evident, 
will be different in each particular case; but it is possibl e, nonetheless, to cast up a reckoning sufficiently true to 
average experience to have at least some significance for every one of us. 
 Let us begin with the obvious but nonetheless very stra nge fact that all human bei ngs pass nearly a third of 
their lives in a state that is completely non-historical , non-social, non-cultu ral -- and even no n-spatial and non-
temporal. In other words, for eight hours out of every twenty-four they ar e asleep. Sleep is the indispensable 
condition of physical health and mental sanity. It is in sleep that our body repairs the damage caused by the day's 
work and the day's amusements; in sleep that the vis medicatrix naturae overcomes our disease; in sleep that our 
conscious mind finds some respite from the cravings and aversions, the fears, anxietie s and hatreds, the planning 
and calculating which drive it during waking hours to th e brink of nervous exhaus tion and sometimes beyond. 
Many of us are chronically sick and more or less far gone  in neurosis. That we are not much sicker and much 
madder than we are is due exclusively to that most bl essed and blessing of all na tural graces, sleep. Even a 
Himmler, even a Marquis de Sade, even  a Jay Gould and a Zaharoff must resign  themselves to being, during thirty 
per cent of their existence, innocent, sane and obscurely at one with the divine ground of all being. One of the most 
dreadfully significant facts about political, social and ecclesiastical institutions is that they never sleep. In so far as 
individual human beings create and direct them, they embody the ideals and the calculating cleverness, inextricably 
combined with the conscious or unconscious cravings, aversions and fears, of a group of waking selves. Every 
large organization exists in a state of chronic insomnia and so can never receive directly those accessions of new 
life and wisdom which, in dreams and dreamless unconsci ousness, come sometimes trickling, sometimes pouring 
in from the depths of the sleeper's being or even fr om some source beyond those de pths. An institution can be 
revivified only by individuals who, because they are cap able of sleep and inspira tion, are capable of becoming 
more than themselves. 
 The enlightened person, as the word "Buddha" implies, is  fully and forever awake -- but with a wakefulness 
radically different from that of the social organization; for he is awake even during the day to that which the 
unregenerate can approach only in sleep, that which soci al organizations never appr oach at all. When such 
organizations are left to their insomnia, when they are permitted to function according to the laws of their own 
being, subordinating individual insights to collective tr adition, they become  mad -- not like an individual lunatic, 
but with a solemn, traditional and systematic madness th at is at once majestic and ludicrous, grotesque and 
terrifying. There is a hymn which exhorts us to thank God that the Church unsleeping her watch is keeping. Instead 
of rejoicing in the fact we should lament and deplore.  Unsleeping, the Church kept watch, century after century, 
over its bank accounts, its lands, its pres tige, its political influence, its idol atrously worshiped dogmas, rites and 
traditions. All the enormous evils and imbecilities recorded in ecclesiastical history are the products of this fatal 
incapacity of a social organization to go to sleep. 
 Conversely all the illuminations and charities of personal re ligion have their source in the Spirit, which 
transcends and yet is the most inwa rd ground of our own being, and with wh ich, gratuitously in sleep, and in 
moments of insight and illumination prepared for by a deliber ate "dying to self," the individual spirit is able to 
establish contact. 
 One culture gives us the pyramids, another the Escori al, a third, Forest Lawn. But the act of dying remains 
always and everywhere identical. Like sleep, death is ou tside the pale of history -- a molecular experience 
unaffected by the state of the social gas. Every individual has to die alone, to die by himself to himself. The

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

118
experience cannot be shared; it can only be privately undergone. "How painful it is," writes Shestov, "to read 
Plato's account of the last days of Socr ates! His hours are numbered, and he talk s, talks, talks. . . That is what 
comes of having disciples. They won't allow you even to di e in peace. The best death is the death we consider the 
worst, when one is alone, far from home, when one dies in the hospital lik e a dog in a ditch. Then at least one 
cannot spend one's last moments pretending, talking, teachi ng. One is allowed to keep silence and prepare oneself 
for the terrible and perhaps specially important event. Pascal's sister reports that he too talked a great deal before he 
died. Musset, on the contrary, wept like a child. May it not be that Socrates and Pascal talked as much as they did 
because they were afraid of crying?" 
 Hardly less unhistorical than death is old age. Modern  medicine has done something to make the last years 
of a long life a little more comfortable, and pension pl ans have relieved the aged of  a dependence upon charity or 
their children. Nevertheless, in spite of vitamins and social security, old age is  still essentially what it was for our 
ancestors -- a period of experienced decl ine and regression, to which the facts of contemporary history, the social 
and economic movements of the day are more or less completely irrelevant. The aging man of the middle twentieth 
century lives, not in the public world of atomic physics and conflicting ideologies, of welfare states and supersonic 
speed, but in his strictly private universe of physical weakness and mental decay. 
 It was the same with our philosopher. Laplace was his older contemporary; Cuvi er and Ampère were his 
friends. But his last years were lived, not in the age of scie ntific progress which history records, but in the intimate 
experience of dying ever more completely to love, to pleasure, to enthusiasm, to sensibility, even to his intellect. 
"The most painful manner of dying to oneself," he write s, "is to be left with only so much of a reflective 
personality as suffices to recognize th e successive degradation of those f aculties, on account of which one could 
feel some self-esteem." Compared with  these facts of his immediate experi ence, the social and the historical 
seemed unimportant. 
 Progress is something that exists on the level of the species (as increasing freedom from and control over 
natural environment) and perhaps also on the level of the society or the civilization (as an increase in prosperity, 
knowledge and skill, an improvement in laws and manners). For the individual it does not exist, except as an item 
of abstract knowledge. Like the other trends and movements r ecorded in books of history-as-something-in-the-
mind-of-the-historian, it is never an object of individual experience. And this  for two reasons. The first of these 
must be sought in the fact that man's organic life is intrinsically non-progressive. It does not keep on going up and 
up, in the manner of the graphs  representing literacy, or national income, or industrial production. On the contrary, 
it is a curve like a flat tened cocked hat. We are bor n, rise through youth to maturity , continue for a time on one 
level, then drop down through old age and decrepitude into death. An aging member of even the most progressive 
society experiences only molecular decay, never gaseous expansion. 
 The second reason for the individual' s incapacity to experience progress  is purely psychological and has 
nothing to do with the facts of physiol ogy. Most human beings have an almost infinite capacity for taking things 
for granted. By the mere fact of ha ving come into existence, the most amazing novelty becomes in a few months, 
even a few days, a familiar and, as it were, self-evident pa rt of the environment. Every aspiration is for a golden 
ceiling overhead; but the moment that ceiling has been reached, it becomes a commo nplace and disregarded floor, 
on which we dance or trudge in a manner indistinguishable, so  far as our feeling-tone is  concerned, from that in 
which we danced and trudged on the floor below. Moreover, every individual is born into a world having a social 
and technological floor of a particul ar kind, and is completely unaware, except through reading and by hearsay, 
that there was ever any other kind of floor. Between the members of one generation and the members of the 
preceding and subsequent generations there is no continuity of immediate experience. This means that one can read 
or write books about progress, but that one cannot feel it or live it in the same way as one feels a pain or lives one's 
old age. 
 Sleep and old age account for about th irty years of our allotted three scor e and ten. In other words, nearly 
half of every life is passed either completely outside of the social and the historical or in a world of enforced 
privacy, to which the social and the historical are only slightly relevant. Like the experience of old age, the 
experience of sickness takes the individual out of history and society. This does not mean, of course, that history is 
without effect on the bodily and mental  health of individuals. What it does  mean, however, is that, though certain 
diseases are less common and less dange rous than in the past, though hospitals  are better and medical treatment 
more rational, sickness still causes an alienation from the worl d of history, and that, while it lasts, this alienation is

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

119
as complete as ever it was in the past. Moreover, in spit e of the progress in hygiene a nd medicine, in spite of the 
elimination from many parts of the earth of the contagious diseases which used  to plague our forefathers, sickness 
is still appallingly common. Chronic, de generative ailments are on the increas e, and so are mental disorders, 
ranging from mild neuroses, with th eir accompanying physical disabilities , to severe and often incurable 
psychoses. Our fever hospitals are empt y, but our asylums are full to bursti ng. Thanks to events which can be 
recorded in social history, a person living in the twentieth century is much less likely to catch the plague than was a 
person living in the fourteenth , but rather more likely to develop canc er, diabetes, coronary disease, hypertension, 
neurosis, psychosis and all the varieties of psychosomatic disorders. 
 Like death, sickness has had a great  variety of cultural concomitants; but these changing concomitants have 
not changed the essential fact that sick persons experien ce an alienation from their culture and society, that they 
temporarily fall out of history into th eir private world of pain and fever. Thus, because Biran was a child of the 
century which had perfected the chronometer and the cl ockwork flute player, he always, though a strenuous anti-
mechanist, referred to his body as "the machine." And because St. Francis had been brought up in thirteenth-
century Umbria, among peasants and th eir beasts, he always referred to his body as "Brother Ass." Differences in 
place, work and folk account for these differences in te rminology. But when "the machine" suffered, it suffered in 
just the same way as "Brother Ass" had suffered nearly six hundred years before, in just the same way as St. Paul's 
"body of this death" had suffered in the first century. Sickness, then, and old ag e take us out of history. Does this 
mean that the young and the healthy ar e permanently in history? Not at all. In the normal person, all the 
physiological processes are in their nature unhistorical and incommunicably non-social. The arts of breathing and 
assimilation, for example, of regulating body temperature and the chemistry of the blood, were acquired before our 
ancestors were even human. Digestion an d excretion have no histor y; they are always there, as given facts of 
experience, as permanent elements in the destiny of every individual man and woma n who has ever lived. The 
pleasures of good and the discomforts of  bad digestion are the same at al l times, in all places, under whatever 
political regime or cultural dispensation. 
 Maine de Biran, as we learn from his Journal, had a very delicate and capricious digestion. When it worked 
well, he found life worth living and e xperienced a sense of well-being which made even a dinner party at his 
mother-in-law's seem delightful. But when it worked badl y, he felt miserable, found it impossible to think his own 
thoughts or even to understand what he read. "Van Helmont," he thinks, "w as quite right when he situated in the 
stomach the center of all our affections and the active cau se of our intellectual dispositions and even our ideas." 
This is not a piece of cheap cynicism , for never was any man less cynical th an our philosopher. It is simply the 
statement of a fact in the life of incarnated spirits -- a fa ct which has to be accepted, whether we like it or not, and 
made the best of. A great Catholic mystic has recorded his inability to place his mind in the presence of God during 
the half hour which followed his prin cipal repast. It was the same with Biran. After dinner he was generally 
incapable of any but the most physiologically private life. The psychologist and th e metaphysician disappeared, 
and for an hour or two thei r place was taken by the mere dim consci ousness of a stomach. Biran felt these 
humiliations profoundly and never ceased to bemoan them. His friend Ampère, on the contrary, preferred to treat 
his body with a slightly theatrical defiance. "You ask of my h ealth," he writes in reply to an inquiry from Maine de 
Biran. "As if that were the question! Between us there can be no question but of what is eternal." Noble words! 
And yet all knowledge is in the knower according to the mode of the knower. Can th e man who has an unsound 
body acquire an undistorted knowledge of the eternal? Perh aps health is no t without its importance even for 
philosophers. Though themselves non-histor ical, physiological processes can, of course, be influenced by the kind 
of events that are r ecorded in short-range, non-philosophical history books. By way of obvious example, wars and 
revolutions ordinarily result in famine, and famine strikes at the very  roots of organic life in countless individuals. 
On a smaller scale, the same effects may be produced by a slump or, for certain classes of a population, by a faulty 
distribution of purchasing power. 
 As an organic experience, sex is as  private and unhistorical a matter as death or sleep, digestion or sickness. 
As a psychological experience it may be shared to some extent by two people -- not indeed completely, for no 
experience can be shared completely, but as much as an y experience of one person can be participated in by 
another. Je crois bien, says Mallarmé. 
 
 Je crois bien que deux bouches n'ont  
 Bu, ni son amant, ni ma mère,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

120
 Jamais à la même Chimère.  
 
 In the final analysis the poet is right. But fortunately an alysis is rarely pushed to the limit. For the practical 
purposes of life, the Chimeras which two lovers drink at on e another's lips are sufficiently alike to be regarded as 
identical. 
 Social control of sex behavior is through laws, relig ious precepts, ethical ideal s and codes of manners. At 
every period of history great  organizations and a host of individuals ha ve dedicated themselves to the task of 
compelling or persuading people to conform, in sexual ma tters, to the locally accepted norm. To what extent has 
this drive for conformity been succe ssful? The evidence on whic h an accurate answer to this question might be 
based is simply not available. But such evidence as we have tends rather emphatically to suggest that collective 
efforts to make the sexual life of indi viduals conform to a socially acceptabl e pattern are seldom successful. In a 
minority of cases they are evidently successful enough to produce more or  less severe mental conflicts and even 
neuroses. But the majority go their private way without paying more than lip-service to religion and respectability. 
 Thus, fifty years ago, the rules of se xual decorum were much more rigid th an they are today, and yet, if the 
Kinsey Report may be believed, the actual behavior of men who were young at the be ginning of our century was 
very similar to the behavior of thos e who were young in its middle forties. Among the writers of memoirs, diaries 
and autobiographies few indeed have left us an honest and unvarnished account of their sexual behavior. But if we 
read such all but unique documents as Jean-Jacques Bouc hard's account of a seventee nth-century adolescence and 
youth, or as Samuel Pepys's day-by-da y record of how the average sensua l man comported himself a generation 
later, we shall be forced to the conclusion that laws  and precepts, ideals and conventions have a good deal less 
influence on private life than most educators would care to admit. Pepys grew to manhood under the 
Commonwealth; Bouchard, during the reviva l of French Catholicism after the close of the religious wars. Both 
were piously brought up; both had to listen to innumerable sermons and exhortations; both were assured that sexual 
irregularity would lead them infallibl y to Hell. And each behaved like a typi cal case from the pages of Ellis or 
Ebbing or Professor Kinsey. The same enormous gulf between theory and act ual behavior is revealed by the 
casuists of the Counter Reformation a nd, in the Middle Ages, by th e denunciatory moralists and the secular tellers 
of tales. Modern authors sometimes wr ite as though the literary conventions of chivalrous or Platonic love, which 
have appeared at various times in European history, were  the reflections of an unusua lly refined behavior on the 
part of writers and the members of their public. Again, such evidence as  we have points to quite different 
conclusions. The fact that he was the au thor of all those sonnets did not prevent Petrarch from acting, in another 
poet's words, "as doves and sparrows do." And the man wh o transformed Beatrice into a heavenly principle was 
not only a husband and father, but also, if we may believe his first biographer -- and there seems to be absolutely 
no reason why we should question Boccaccio's good faith or th e truthfulness of his informants -- a frequenter of 
prostitutes. Culture's relation to private life is at once mo re superficial, more spotty  and more Pickwickian than 
most historians are ready to admit. 
 In the individual's intellectual, artistic and religious activities history plays, as we might expect, a much 
more considerable part than in the strictly private life of phys iological processes and pe rsonal emotions. But even 
here we find enclaves, as it were, and Indian Reserv ations of the purest non-hi storicity. The insights and 
inspirations of genius are gratuitous graces, which seem to be perfectly indepe ndent of the kind of  events that are 
described in the works of philosophical or non-philosophical historians. Cert ain favored persons were as richly 
gifted a thousand or five thousand y ears ago as similarly favored persons are today. Talent exists within a 
particular cultural and social framework, but itself belongs to realms outside the pales of culture and society. 
 At any given moment the state of the gas sets certai n limits to what the creative molecules can think and do. 
But within those limits the performance of the exceptionally gifted is as rema rkable, aesthetically speaking, in one 
age as another. In this context I remember a conversati on between the directors of tw o of the world's largest and 
best museums. They agreed that, from th e resources at their disposal, they c ould put on an exhibition of Art in the 
Dark Ages which should be as fine (within the limits imposed by the social conditions of the time) and as 
aesthetically significant as an  exhibition of the art of a ny other period. Historians ha ve tried to find social and 
cultural explanations for the f act that some epochs are very rich in me n of talent, others abnormally poor. And, in 
effect, it may be that certain environments are favorable to the development of creative gifts, while others are 
unfavorable. But meanwhile we must remember that every individual has his or her genes, that mating combines

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

121
and recombines these genes in an indefinite number of ways, and that the chances ag ainst the kind of combination 
that results in a Shakespeare or a Newton are a good many millions to one. Moreover, in any game of hazard we 
observe that, though in the long run ever ything conforms to the laws of proba bility, in the short run there may be 
the most wildly improbable runs of good or bad luck. Peri clean Athens, Renaissance Italy, Elizabethan England -- 
these may be the equivalents, on the genetic plane, of those extraordinary freaks of chance which sometimes permit 
roulette players to break the bank. To those politically minded people who believe that man can be perfected from 
outside and that environment can do ever ything, this is, of course, an into lerable conclusion. Hence Lysenko and 
the current Soviet attack upon reactionary, idealist Mende lo-Morganism. The issue between Soviet geneticists and 
the geneticists of the West is similar in essence to th at which divided the Pelagians from the Augustinians. Like 
Helvétius and the Behaviorists, Pelagius affirmed that we are born non pleni (without an inherited character) and 
that we are affected by the sin of Adam non propagine sed exemplo -- in our modern ja rgon, through social 
heredity rather than physical, individual heredity. 
 Augustine and his followers retorted than man in his nature is totally depraved, that he can do nothing by 
his own efforts and that salvation is only through grace. According to Soviet theory, Western geneticists are pure 
Augustinians. In reality they occupy a position halfway between Augustine and Pelagius. Like Augustine, they 
affirm that we are born with "original sin," not to menti on "original virtue"; but they hold, with Pelagius, that we 
are not wholly predestined, but can do quite a lot to help ourselves. For ex ample, we can make it easier for gifted 
individuals to develop their creative ta lents, but we cannot, by modifying the environment, increase the number of 
such individuals. 
 Where religion is concerne d, the experiences of indi viduals may be classified  under two main heads: 
experiences related to homemade deit ies and all too human notions, feelings  and imaginings about the universe; 
and experiences related to the primordial fact of an immanent and transcendent Spirit. Experiences of the first class 
have their source in history; those of the second class ar e non-historical. In so far as  they are non-historical and 
immediately given, the religious experiences of all times and places resemble one another and convey a knowledge 
of the divine nature. In so far as they are concerned with the all too human, the homemade and the historically 
conditioned, the various religions of th e world are dissimilar and tell us little or nothing about the primordial fact. 
The direct apprehension of the immane nce of a transcendent Spirit is an experience of which we have records 
going far back in time, an experience which, it would se em, can be had by persons belonging to very primitive 
cultures. At what point in their deve lopment human beings became capable of  this apprehension we do not know; 
but for practical purposes we are probably justified in saying that, at least for some persons, this apprehension is as 
much an immediate datum, as little conditioned by history, as the experience of a world of objects. Only the verbal 
descriptions of the mystical experience are historically conditioned; the experiences themselves are not. Compare, 
for example, the literary styles of William Law and Jacob Boehme, the first exquisitely pure, lucid and elegant, the 
second barbarous, obscure, crabbed in the extreme. And yet Law chose Boehme as his spiritual master -- chose him 
because, through the verbal disguises, he could recognize a spiritual experience essentially similar to his own. Or 
consider our philosopher and his English contemporary, William Wordsworth. Both were "Nature mystics," to 
whom were vouchsafed ecstatic insights into the divine ground of all bei ng. Their immediate experiences were 
essentially similar. We may add, I think, that they were both essentially non-historical. 
 In Europe, it is true, the capacity to see in the more  savage aspects of Nature, not only terrifying power, but 
also beauty, love and wisdom is of fairly recent grow th and may be regarded as  being, in some measure, 
historically conditioned. In the Far East, on the contrary, this capacity is of very high antiquity. Moreover Nature is 
not invariably savage, and at all times and in all places many persons have had no difficulty in perceiving that her 
more smiling aspects were manifestations of the divine. The ubiquitous cult of trees, the myths of Eden and 
Avalon, of Ava-iki and the Garden of the Hesperides, are sufficient proof that "Nature mysticism" is primordial 
and permanent, as unconditionally "built-in" and non-hi storical as any other uncha nging datum of our psycho-
physical experience. Biran and Wordswor th were among those moderns who had not chosen or been compelled to 
close the doors of their perception. They actually saw -- as all might see if they were not self-blinded or the victims 
of unfavorable circumstances -- the divine mystery that manifests itself in Nature. 
 But while Wordsworth (in his youth) was a great poet, capable of creating, within the splendid tradition of 
English poetry, a new medium of expressi on as nearly adequate to ineffable experience as any expression can be, 
Biran at his most lyrical was merely an imitator, a nd an imitator merely of Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Both

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

122
historically and non-historically, as i nheritor of a stylistic tradition and as literary genius, he was far less well 
equipped than Wordsworth to tell of what he had actually perceived and unde rstood. And yet there is no reason to 
suppose that his experiences at Grateloup and in the Pyrenees were intrinsically  inferior to the experiences which 
Wordsworth had in the Lake Country or at Tintern. 
 We see, then, that while every person's life is lived within a given culture and a given period of history, by 
no means all the experiences in that life are hist orically conditioned.  And those which ar e not historically 
conditioned -- sleep, for example, all the processes of our or ganic life in health or si ckness, all our unmediated 
apprehensions of God as Spirit and of God as manifest in Nature and persons -- are more fundamental, more 
important for us in our amphibious existence between time and eternity, than those which are so conditioned. 
 Gas laws are entirely different from the laws govern ing molecules. Individuals think, feel and variously 
apprehend; societies do not. Men achiev e their Final End in a timeless moment  of conscious expe rience. Societies 
are incapable of conscious experience, and therefore can never, in the very nature of things, be "saved" or 
"delivered." Ever since the eighteen th century many philosophers have argued, and many non-philosophers have 
more or less passionately believed, that Mankind will so mehow be redeemed by progressive History. In his book 
Faith and History, Dr. Reinhold Niebuhr has rightly insisted that, in itsel f, history is not, and cannot be, a 
redemptive process. But he goes on airily to dismiss th e age-old revelation that man's Final End is the unitive 
knowledge of God here and now, at any time and in any place, and proclaims that, though history is not redemptive 
in any ordinary sense of the word, it is  yet supremely important for salvation in some Pickwickian sense -- because 
of the General Resurrection and the Last Judgment. "The se eschatological expectations in New Testament faith, 
however embarrassing when taken literally, are necessary," he insists, "for a Christian interpretation of history." So 
far as I am able to understand him, Dr. Niebuhr seems to im ply that the meaning of life will be clarified only in the 
future, through a history culminating in "the end of history, in which historical existence will be transfigured." 
 This seems to imply that all persons living in the pa st, present and pre-millennial future are in some sort 
mere means and instruments, and that their redemption depends, not upon a personal relationship, here and now, 
with the divine Spirit, but upon future ev ents in which it is impossible for them  to participate. Dr. Niebuhr rejects 
the classical and oriental conceptions of history on the gr ound that they reduce historical events to the "inferior 
realm of coming-to-be and passing away." They offer no hope for the fulfillment of the unique capacities of human 
personality. But "human persona lity" is an abstraction. In reality ther e are only individual pe rsonalities. Between 
personalities existing today and personalities existing in 3000 B.C.  there is no continu ity of experience. 
Fulfillments of persons living now are not fulfillments of persons living then; nor will fulfillments of persons living 
during the millennium be fulfillments of persons living in the twentieth century. Dr. Niebuhr obscures this obvious 
fact by speaking of societies as though they possessed the characteristics of persons. Thus "mankind will continue 
to 'see through a glass darkly.' " Again, "collective organisms," like individuals, have a "sense of the contingent and 
insecure character of social existence." But it is very doubtful whether a society is an organism; and it is certain 
that it can know nothing about the character of human existe nce. Individuals may make true statements about large 
groups; but large groups can say nothing a bout either individuals or themselves . Or consider the following: "Man 
in his individual life and in his total enterprise, moves from a limited to a more extensive expression of freedom 
over nature." Here everything depends upon an ambiguity of  language. By a simple trick of sentence construction 
"man in his individual life" is assimilated to "man in his total enterprise." But the first phrase stands for Smith and 
Jones, for all the Smiths and Joneses since the Ice Age,  each considered as an e xperiencing person; the second 
stands for those very large groups with  which actuaries, sociologists and hi storians are accustomed to deal. Gas 
laws are not the same as the laws governing molecules. What  is true of large numbers is not true of individuals. 
From the fact that a society has ach ieved some measure of control over its  natural environment it does not follow 
that the individuals who at any given moment constitute that society enjoy an analogous freedom in regard to their 
environment -- an environment consisting of Nature, th eir neighbors and their own th oughts, passions and organic 
processes. In the history of societie s novelty is constantly emerging; but w ithin the framework of these novelties 
the problems with which individuals have to deal remain fundamentally the same . The fact that one  can travel in a 
jet plane rather than on foot does not, of itself, make the solution of those problems any easier. 
 "I show you sorrow," said the Budd ha, "and the ending of sorrow." Sorro w is the unregenerate individual's 
life in time, the life of craving and av ersion, pleasure and pain, organic growth and decay. The ending of sorrow is 
the awareness of eternity -- a knowledge that liberates the kn ower and transfigures the temporal world of his or her

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

123
experience. Every individual ex ists within the fields of a particular history, culture and society. Sorrow exists 
within all fields and can be ended within all fields. Nevertheless it remains true that some fields put more obstacles 
in the way of individual development and individual enlightenment than do others. Our business, as politicians and 
economists, is to create and maintain the social field which offers the fewest possible impediments to the ending of 
sorrow. It is a fact of experience that if we are led into powerful and prolonged temptations, we generally succumb. 
Social, political and economic reforms can accomplish only two things: improvement in the conditions of organic 
life, and the removal of certain temptations to which individuals are all too apt to yield -- with disastrous results for 
themselves and others. For example, a centralized and hier archical organization in State or Church constitutes a 
standing temptation to abuse of power by the few and to subservient irresponsib ility and imbecility on the part of 
the many. These temptations may be reduced or even el iminated by reforms aiming at the decentralization of 
wealth and power and the creation of a federated system of self-governing co-operatives. 
 Getting rid of these and other temptations by means of  social reforms will not, of course, guarantee that 
there shall be an ending of sorrow for all individuals within the reformed society. All we can say is that in a society 
which does not constantly tempt individuals to behave abominably the obstacles to personal deliverance will 
probably be fewer than in a society whose structure is such that men and women are all the time encouraged to 
indulge their worst propensities. 
 Of all possible fields, about the worst, so far as pers ons are concerned, is that within which ever greater 
numbers of our contemporaries are being forced to live -- th e field of militaristic and i ndustrialized totalitarianism. 
Within this field, persons are treated as means to non -personal ends. Their right to a private existence, 
unconditioned by history and society, is denied on principle; and whereas the old tyrannies found it hard to make 
this denial universally effective, their modern counterpa rts, thanks to applied scie nce and the improved techniques 
of inquisition and coercion, are ab le to translate their princi ples into practice on a scal e and with a discriminatory 
precision unknown in the past. 
 "How small," Dr. Johnson could write two centuries ago,  
 
 How small of all that human hearts endure  
 The part which kings or laws can cause or cure!  
 
In the eighteenth century it was still pe rfectly true that "public affairs vex no man"; that the news of a lost battle 
caused "no man to eat his dinner the worse" ; that "when a butcher tells you that his heart bleeds for his country, he 
has, in fact, no uneasy feeling." And even in the bloody sixteenth century Montaigne "doubts if he can honestly 
enough confess with how very mean a sacrifice of his peac e of mind and tranquillity he has lived more than half 
his life, whilst his country was in ruins." But the progre ss of technology is rapidly changing this relatively happy 
state of things. The modern dictator has, not only the de sire, but also the effective means to reduce the whole man 
to the mere citizen, to deprive individuals of all private life but the most rudimentarily physical and to convert them 
at last into unquestioning instruments of a social organization whose ends and purposes are different from, and 
indeed incompatible with, the purposes and ends of personal existence. 
(From "Variations on a Philosopher," Themes and Variations) 
 
 
 
Usually Destroyed 
 
 Our guide through the labyrinthine st reets of Jerusalem was a young Christ ian refugee from the other side 
of the wall which now divides the ancien t city from the new, the non-viable state of Jordan from the non-viable 
state of Israel. He was a sad, embittered young man -- and well he might be. His prospects had been blighted, his 
family reduced from comparative wealth to the most abject penury, their house and land taken away from them, 
their bank account frozen and devaluat ed. In the circumstances, th e surprising thing was not his bitterness, but the 
melancholy resignation with which it was tempered. 
 He was a good guide -- almost too good, indeed; for he was quite remorseless in his determination to make 
us visit all those deplorable churches which were built, during the nineteenth century, on the ruins of earlier places 
of pilgrimage. There are tourists whose greatest pleasure is a trip through historical associations and their own

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

124
fancy. I am not one of them. When I tr avel, I like to move among intrinsica lly significant objects, not through an 
absence peopled only by literary refe rences, Victorian monuments and the surm ises of archaeologists. Jerusalem, 
of course, contains much more than ghosts and archit ectural monstrosities. Besides being one of the most 
profoundly depressing of the earth's cities, it is one of th e strangest and, in its own way, one of the most beautiful. 
Unfortunately our guide was far too conscientious to sp are us the horrors and the unembodied, or ill-embodied, 
historical associations. We had to s ee everything -- not merely St. Anne's and St. James's and the Dome of the 
Rock, but the hypothetical site of Caiaphas's house and what the Anglicans had built in the seventies, what the Tsar 
and the German Emperor had countered with in the eightie s, what had been considered beautiful in the early 
nineties by the Copts or the French Franciscans. But, luckily, even at the dreariest moments of our pilgrimage there 
were compensations. Our sad young man spoke English we ll and fluently, but spoke it as eighteenth-century 
virtuosi played music -- with the addition of fioriture and even whole cadenzas of th eir own invention. His most 
significant contribution to coll oquial English (and, at the same time, to the science and art of history) was the 
insertion into almost every sentence of  the word "usually." What he actually  meant by it, I cannot imagine. It may 
be, of course, that he didn't mean anything at all, and th at what sounded like an adverb was in fact no more than 
one of those vocalized tics to which nervous persons are sometimes subject.  I used to know a professor whose 
lectures and conversations were punctuated, every few seconds, by the phrase, "With a thing with a thing." "With a 
thing with a thing" is manifestly gibberish. But our young friend's no less com pulsive "usually" had a fascinating 
way of making a kind of sense -- much more sense, very  often, than the speaker ha d intended. "This area," he 
would say as he showed us one of the Victorian monstrosities, "this area" [it was one of his favorite words] "is very 
rich in antiquity. St. Helena built here a very vast chur ch, but the area was usually destroyed by the Samaritans in 
the year 529 after Our Lord Jesus Christ. Then the Crus aders came to the area, and bu ilt a new church still more 
vast. Here were mosaics the most beautiful in the world. In  the seventeenth century after Our Lord Jesus Christ the 
Turks usually removed the lead from the roof to make ammunition; consequently ra in entered the area and the 
church was thrown down. The present area was erected by the Prussian Government in the year 1879 after Our 
Lord Jesus Christ and all these broken-down houses you see over there were us ually destroyed during the war with 
the Jews in 1948." 
 Usually destroyed and then usually rebuilt, in order,  of course, to be destroyed again and then rebuilt, da 
capo ad infinitum. That vocalized tic had compressed all history into a four-syllabled word. Listening to our young 
friend, as we wandered through the brow n, dry squalor of the Holy City, I felt myself overwhelmed, not by the 
mere thought of man's enduring misery, but by an obscure , immediate sense of it, an  organic realization. These 
pullulations among ruins and in the dark of what once were sepulchers; these hordes of sickly children; these galled 
asses and the human beasts of burden bent under enorm ous loads; these mortal enemies beyond the dividing wall; 
these priest-conducted groups of pilgrims befuddling them selves with the vain repetitions, against which the 
founder of their religion had gone out of his way to warn th em -- they were dateless, w ithout an epoch. In this 
costume or that, under one master or another, praying to whichever God was temporarily in charge, they had been 
here from the beginning. Had been here with the Egyptians, been here with Joshua, been here when Solomon in all 
his glory ordered his slaves in all their misery to bu ild the temple, which Nebuchadnezzar had usually demolished 
and Zedekiah, just as usually, had pu t together again. Had been here duri ng the long pointless wars between the 
two kingdoms, and at the next destruction under Ptolemy, the next but one under Antiochus and the next rebuilding 
under Herod and the biggest, best destruction of all by Titus. Had been here when Hadrian abolished Jerusalem and 
built a brand-new Roman city, complete with baths and a th eater, with a temple of Jupiter, and a temple of Venus, 
to take its place. Had been here when the insurrection of Bar Cocheba was drowned in blood. Had been here while 
the Roman Empire declined and turned Christian, when C hosroes the Second destroyed the churches and when the 
Caliph Omar brought Islam and, most unusua lly, destroyed nothing. Had been here to meet the Crusaders and then 
to wave them good-by, to welcome the Turks and then to watch them retreat before Allenby. Had been here under 
the Mandate and through the troubles of '48, and were he re now and would be here, no doubt, in the same brown 
squalor, alternately building and destroying, killing and being killed, indefinitely. 
 "I do not think," Lord Russell has re cently written, "that the sum of human misery has ever in the past been 
so great as it has been in the last twenty-five years." One is inclined to  agree. Or are we, on second thoughts, 
merely flattering ourselves? At most pe riods of history moralists have liked to boast that theirs was the most 
iniquitous generation since the time of Cain -- the most iniquitous and therefore, si nce God is just, the most

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

125
grievously afflicted. Today, for example, we think of the thirteenth cen tury as one of the supremely creative 
periods of human history. But the men who were actua lly contemporary with the cathedrals and Scholastic 
Philosophy regarded their age as  hopelessly degenerate, uniquely bad a nd condignly punished. Were they right, or 
are we? The answer, I suspect is: Bot h. Too much evil and too much sufferi ng can make it impossible for men to 
be creative; but within very wide limits greatness is pe rfectly compatible with organized insanity, sanctioned crime 
and intense, chronic unhappiness for the majority. Every one  of the great religions preaches a mixture of profound 
pessimism and the most extravagant optimism. "I show  you sorrow," says the Buddha, pointing to man in his 
ordinary unregenerate condition. And in the same context Ch ristian theologians speak of the Fall, of Original Sin, 
of the Vale of Tears, while Hindus refer to the worki ngs of man's home-made destiny, his evil karma. But over 
against the sorrow, the tears, the self-g enerated, self-inflicted disasters, wh at superhuman prospects! If he so 
wishes, the Hindu affirms, a man can realize his identity wi th Brahman, the Ground of all being; if he so wishes, 
says the Christian, he can be filled with God; if he so wishes, says the Buddhist, he can live in a transfigured world 
where nirvana and samsara, the eternal and the temporal , are one. But, alas -- and from optimism based on the 
experience of the few, the saints an d sages return to the pessimism forced upon them by their observation of the 
many -- the gate is narrow, the threshold high, few are ch osen because few choose to be chosen. In practice man 
usually destroys himself -- but has done  so up till now a little less thoroughly than he has built himself up. In spite 
of everything, we are still here. The spirit of destruction has been willing enough, but for most of historical time its 
technological flesh has been weak. The Mongols had only horses as transport, only bows and spears and butchers' 
knives for weapons; if they had possesse d our machinery, they could have depopul ated the planet. As it was, they 
had to be content with small triumphs  -- the slaughter of only a few millions , the stamping out of civilization only 
in Western Asia. 
 In this universe of ours nobody has ever succeeded in getting anything for nothing. In certain fields, 
progress in the applied sciences and the arts of organi zation has certainly lessened human misery; but it has done 
so at the cost of increasing it in others. The worst enemy of life, freedom and th e common decencies is total 
anarchy; their second worst enemy is total efficiency. Huma n interests are best served when society is tolerably 
well organized and industry moderately advanced. Chao s and ineptitude are anti-human; but so too is a 
superlatively efficient government, equipped with all the products of a highl y developed technology. When such a 
government goes in for usually destroying, the whole race is in danger. 
 The Mongols were the aesthetes of militarism; they be lieved in gratuitous massacre, in destruction for 
destruction's sake. Our malice is less pure and spontaneous; but, to make up fo r this deficiency, we have ideals. 
The end proposed, on either side of the Iron Curtain, is nothing less than the Good of Humanity and its conversion 
to the Truth. Crusades can go on for centuries, and wars in the name of God or Humanity are generally diabolic in 
their ferocity. The unprecedented depth of human misery in  our time is proportionate to  the unprecedented height 
of the social ideals entertained by the totalitarians on the one side, the Christians and the secularist democrats on 
the other. 
 And then there is the question of simple arithmetic. There are far more people on the earth today than there 
were in any earlier century. The miseries which have been the usual consequence of the usual course of nature and 
the usual behavior of human beings are the lot toda y, not of the three hundred millions of men, women and 
children who were contemporary with Christ, but of more than two and a half billions. Obviously, then, the sum of 
our present misery cannot fail to be greater than the sum of  misery in the past. Every i ndividual is the center of a 
world, which it takes very little to tr ansform into a world of unadulterated suffering. The catastrophes and crimes 
of the twentieth century can transform almost ten times as many human universes into private hells as did the 
catastrophes and crimes of two thousand years ago. Moreover, thanks to improvements in technology, it is possible 
for fewer people to do more harm to greater numbers than ever before.  
 After the capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, how many Jews were carried off to Babylon? Jeremiah 
puts the figure at four thousand six hundred, the compiler of the Second Book of Kings at ten thousand. Compared 
with the forced migrations of our time, the Exile was th e most trivial affair. How many millions were uprooted by 
Hitler and the Communists? How many more  millions were driven out of Pakistan into India, out of India into 
Pakistan? How many hundreds of thousands  had to flee, with our young guide, from their homes in Israel? By the 
waters of Babylon ten thousand at the most sat down and wept. In the single refugee camp at Bethlehem there are 
more exiles than that. And Bethlehem' s is only one of dozens of such camps scattered far and wide over the Near

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

126
East. 
 So it looks, all things considered, as though Lord Russe ll were right -- that the sum of misery is indeed 
greater today than at any time in the past. And what of  the future? Germ warfare and the H-bomb get all the 
headlines and, for that very reason, may never be resorted to. Those who talk  a great deal about suicide rarely 
commit it. The greatest threat to happiness is biological.  There were about twelve hundred million people on the 
planet when I was born, si x years before the turn of the century. Today there are two thousand seven hundred 
millions; thirty years from now there will probably be four thousand millions. At present about sixteen hundred 
million people are underfed. In the nineteen-eighties the to tal may well have risen to twenty-five hundred millions, 
of whom a considerable nu mber may actually be starving. In many part s of the world famine may come even 
sooner. In his Report on the Census of  1951 the Registrar General of India has summed up the biological problem 
as it confronts the second most po pulous country of the world. There ar e now three hundred and seventy-five 
million people living within the borders of India, and th eir numbers increase by five millions annually. The current 
production of basic foods is seventy million tons a year, and the highest production that  can be achieved in the 
foreseeable future is ninety-four million tons. Ninety-f our million tons will support four hundred and fifty million 
people at the present substa ndard level, and the populati on of India will pass the f our hundred and fifty million 
mark in 1969. After that, there will be a condition of what the Registrar General calls "catastrophe." 
 In the index at the end of the sixth volume of Dr. Toynbee's A Study of History, Popilius Laenas gets five 
mentions and Porphyry of Batamaea, two; but the word you would expect to find between these names, Population, 
is conspicuous by its absence. In hi s second volume, Mr. Toynbee has writte n at length on "t he stimulus of 
pressures" -- but without ever mentioning the most importa nt pressure of them all, the pressure of population on 
available resources. And here is a note in which the author describes his impressions of the Roman Campagna after 
twenty years of absence. "In 1911 the student who made the pilgrimage of  the Via Appia Antica found himself 
walking through a wilderness almost from the moment when he passed beyond the City Walls. . . When he 
repeated the pilgrimage in 1931, he found that, in the in terval, Man had been busily reasserting his mastery over 
the whole stretch of country that lies between Rome a nd the Castelli Romani. . . Th e tension of human energy on 
the Roman Campagna is now beginning to rise again for th e first time since the end of the third century B.C." And 
there the matter is left, without any re ference to the compelling reason for this "rise of tension." Between 1911 and 
1931 the population of Italy had increased by the best part of eight millions. Some of these eight millions went to 
live in the Roman Campagna. And they did so, not beca use Man with a large M had in some mystical way 
increased the tension of human energy, but for the sufficiently obvious reason that there was nowhere else for them 
to go. In terms of a history that takes no cognizance of demographical facts, the past can never be fully understood, 
the present is quite incomprehensible and the future entirely beyond prediction. 
 Thinking, for a change, in demographic as well as in merely cultural, political and religious terms, what 
kind of reasonable guesses can we make about the sum of human misery in the years to come? First, it seems pretty 
certain that more people will be hu ngrier and that, in many parts of the world, malnutrition will modulate into 
periodical or chronic famine. (One would like to know something about the Famines of earlier ages, but the nearest 
one gets to them in Mr. Toynbee's index is a blank space between Muhammad Falak-al-Din and Gaius Fannius.) 
Second, it seems pretty certain that, though they may help in the long run, remedial measures aimed at reducing the 
birthrate will be powerless to avert the miseries lying in wa it for the next generation. Th ird, it seems pretty certain 
that improvements in Agriculture (not  referred to in Mr. Toynbee's index, though Agrigentum gets two mentions 
and Agis IV, King of Sparta, no less th an forty-seven) will be unable to cat ch up with current and foreseeable 
increases in population. If the standard of  living in industrially backward countri es is to be improved, agricultural 
production will have to go up every single year by at least two and a half per cent, a nd preferably by three and a 
half per cent. Instead of which, according to the FAO, Far Eastern food production per head of population will be 
ten per cent less in 1956 (and this assumes that the current Five-Year Plans will be fully  realized) than it was in 
1938. 
 Fourth, it seems pretty certain th at, as a larger and hungrier population "mines the soil" in a desperate 
search for food, the destructive processes of erosion and deforestation will be speede d up. Fertility will therefore 
tend to go down as human numbers go up. (One looks up Erosion in Mr. Toynbee's index but finds only 
Esarhaddon, Esotericism and Esperanto; one hunts for Forests, but has to be content, alas, with Formosus of Porto.) 
 Fifth, it seems pretty certain that the increasing pressure of population upon re sources will result in

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

127
increasing political and social unrest, and that this unrest will culminate in wars, revolutions and counter-
revolutions. 
 Sixth, it seems pretty certain that , whatever the avowed political prin ciples and whatever the professed 
religion of the societies concerned, increasing pressure of population upon reso urces will tend to increase the 
power of the central government and to diminish the lib erties of individual citizens.  For, obviously, where more 
people are competing for less food, each in dividual will have to work harder and longer for his ration, and the 
central government will find it necessary to intervene more  and more frequently in order to save the rickety 
economic machine from total breakdown, and at the same time to repress th e popular discontent begotten by 
deepening poverty. 
 If Lord Russell lives to a hundred and twenty (and, for all our sakes, I hope most fervently that he will), he 
may find himself remembering these middle decades of the tw entieth century as an almost Golden Age. In 1954, it 
is true, he decided that the sum of human misery had neve r been so great as it had been in the preceding quarter 
century. On the other hand, "you ain't seen nuthin' yet." Co mpared with the sum of four billion people's misery in 
the eighties, the sum of two billion miseries just befo re, during and after the Second World War may look like the 
Earthly Paradise. 
 But meanwhile here we were in Jerusalem, looki ng at the usually destroye d antiquities and rubbing 
shoulders with the usually poverty-strick en inhabitants, the usually supersti tious pilgrims. Here was the Wailing 
Wall, with nobody to wail at it; for Israel is on the other side of a barrier, across wh ich there is no communication 
except by occasional bursts of rifle fire, occasional ex changes of hand grenades. Here, propped up with steel 
scaffolding, was the Church of the Holy Sepulchre -- th at empty tomb to which, for three centuries, the early 
Christians paid no attention whatsoever, but which came, af ter the time of Constantine, to be regarded, throughout 
Europe, as the most important thing in the entire universe. And here was Siloam, here St. Anne's, here the Dome of 
the Rock and the site of the Temple, here, more ominous  than Pompeii, the Jewish quarter, leveled, usually, in 
1948 and not yet usually reconstructed. He re, finally, was St. James's, of th e Armenians, gay with innumerable 
rather bad but charming paintings, and a wealth of gaudi ly colored tiles. The great church glowed like a dim 
religious merry-go-round. In all Jerusalem it was the only oasis of cheerfulness.  And not alone of cheerfulness. As 
we came out into the courtyar d, through which the visitor must approach the church's main entrance, we heard a 
strange and wonderful sound. High up, in one of the hous es surrounding the court, somebody was playing the 
opening Fantasia of Bach's Partita in A Minor -- playing it , what was more, remarkably well. From out of the open 
window, up there on the third floor, the or dered torrent of bright pure notes went stream ing out over the city's 
immemorial squalor. Art and religion, philosophy and science, morals and po litics -- these are the instruments by 
means of which men have tried to disc over a coherence in the flux of events , to impose an order on the chaos of 
experience. The most intractable of our experiences is the experience of Time -- the intuition of duration, combined 
with the thought of perpetual perish ing. Music is a device for working dir ectly upon the experience of Time. The 
composer takes a piece of raw, undifferen tiated duration and extracts from it, as  the sculptor extracts the statue 
from his marble, a complex pattern of  tones and silences, of harmonic seque nces and contrapuntal interweavings. 
For the number of minutes it takes to  play or listen to his composition, dur ation is transformed into something 
intrinsically significant, something held  together by the internal logics of  style and temperament, of personal 
feelings interacting wi th an artistic tradition, of creative insights expressing them selves within and beyond some 
given technical convention. This  Fantasia, for example -- with what a tirel ess persistence it drills its way through 
time! How effectively -- and yet with no fuss, no self-conscious heroics -- it transfigures the mortal lapse through 
time into the symbol, into the very fact, of a more than human life! A tunnel of joy and unde rstanding had been 
driven through chaos and was demonstrating, for all to hear , that perpetual perishing is  also perpetual creation. 
Which was precisely what our young friend had been tellin g us, in his own inimitable way, all the time. Usually 
destroyed -- but also, and just  as often, usually rebuilt. Li ke the rain, like sunshine, li ke the grace of God and the 
devastations of Nature, his verbalized tic was perfectly impartial. We  walked out of the courtyard and down the 
narrow street. Bach faded, a donkey brayed, there was a sm ell of undisposed sewage. "I n the year of Our Lord 
1916," our guide informed us, "the Turkish Government usually massacred approximately seven hundred and fifty 
thousand Armenians." 
(From Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

128
 
POLITICS 
 
 
Words and Behavior 
 
 Words form the thread on which we string our experi ences. Without them we should live spasmodically 
and intermittently. Hatred itself is not so strong that animals will not forget it, if distracted, even in the presence of 
the enemy. Watch a pair of cats, crouching on the brink of a fight. Balefully the eyes gl are; from far down in the 
throat of each come bursts of a strange, strangled noise of defiance; as though animated  by a life of their own, the 
tails twitch and tremble. With aimed intensity of loathing!  Another moment and surely there must be an explosion. 
But no; all of a sudden one of the two creatures turns away, ho ists a hind leg in a more than fascist salute and, with 
the same fixed and focused attention as it had given a moment before to its enemy, begins to make a lingual toilet. 
Animal love is as much at the mercy of distractions as  animal hatred. The dumb creation lives a life made up of 
discreet and mutually irrelevant episodes. Such as it is , the consistency of human char acters is due to the words 
upon which all human experiences are strung. We are pur poseful because we can describe our feelings in 
rememberable words, can justify and rationalize our desires in terms of some kind of argument. Faced by an enemy 
we do not allow an itch to distract us from our emotions; the mere word "enemy" is enough to keep us reminded of 
our hatred, to convince us that we do well to be angry. Similarly the word "love" bridges for us those chasms of 
momentary indifference and bored om which gape from time to time between  even the most ardent lovers. Feeling 
and desire provide us with our motive power; words give continuity to what we do and to a considerable extent 
determine our direction. Inappropriate and badly chos en words vitiate thought and lead to wrong or foolish 
conduct. Most ignorances are vincible, and in the greater number of cases stupidity is what the Buddha pronounced 
it to be, a sin. For, consciously, or subconsciously, it is w ith deliberation that we do not know or fail to understand 
-- because incomprehension allows us, with a good conscience, to evade unpl easant obligations and 
responsibilities, because ignorance is the best excuse  for going on doing what one likes, but ought not, to do. Our 
egotisms are incessantly fighting to preserve themselves, not only from external enemies, but also from the assaults 
of the other and better self with which they are so uncomfortably associated. Ignorance is egotism's most effective 
defense against that Dr. Jekyll in us who desires perfection; stupidity, its subtlest stratagem. If, as so often happens, 
we choose to give continuity to our experience by means of words which fals ify the facts, this  is because the 
falsification is somehow to our advantage as egotists. 
 Consider, for example, the case of war. War is enorm ously discreditable to those who order it to be waged 
and even to those who merely tolerate its existence. Furt hermore, to developed sensibilities the facts of war are 
revolting and horrifying. To falsify these facts, and by so doing to make war seem less evil than it really is, and our 
own responsibility in tolerating war less heavy, is doubly to our advantage. By suppressing and distorting the truth, 
we protect our sensibilities and preser ve our self-esteem. Now, language is , among other things, a device which 
men use for suppressing and distorting the truth. Finding th e reality of war too unpleasant to contemplate, we 
create a verbal alternative to that reality, parallel with it, but in quality quite differe nt from it. That which we 
contemplate thenceforward is not th at to which we react emotionall y and upon which we pass our moral 
judgments, is not war as it is in fact, but the fiction of war as it exists in our pleasa ntly falsifying verbiage. Our 
stupidity in using inappropriate language turns out, on analysis, to be the most refined cunning. 
 The most shocking fact about war is  that its victims and its instruments are individual human beings, and 
that these individual human beings are condemned by th e monstrous conventions of politics to murder or be 
murdered in quarrels not their own, to inflict upon the innocent and, innocent themselves of any crime against their 
enemies, to suffer cruelties of every kind. 
 The language of strategy and politics is designed, so fa r as it is possible, to conceal this fact, to make it 
appear as though wars were not fought by individuals drilled to murder one  another in cold blood and without 
provocation, but either by impersonal and therefore wholly non-moral and impassible forces, or else by personified 
abstractions. 
 Here are a few examples of the first kind of falsif ication. In place of "cavalrymen" or "foot-soldiers" 
military writers like to speak of "sabres" and "rules." Here is a sentence from a description of the Battle of

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

129
Marengo: "According to Victor's report, th e French retreat was orderly; it is cer tain, at any rate, that the regiments 
held together, for the six thousand Austrian sabres f ound no opportunity to charge home." The battle is between 
sabres in line and muskets in Echelon -- a mere clash of ironmongery. 
 On other occasions there is no que stion of anything so vulgarly materi al as ironmongery. The battles are 
between Platonic ideas, between the abstractions of phys ics and mathematics. Forces interact; weights are flung 
into scales; masses are set in motion. Or else it is all a matter of geometry. Lines swing and sweep; are protracted 
or curved; pivot on a fixed point. 
 Alternatively the combatants are personal, in the sens e that they are personifications. There is "the enemy," 
in the singular, making "his" plans, striking "his" blows. Th e attribution of personal characteristics to collectivities, 
to geographical expressions, to institutions , is a source, as we shall see, of e ndless confusions in political thought, 
of innumerable political mistakes and crim es. Personification in politics is an er ror which we make because it is to 
our advantage as egotists to be able to feel violently proud of our country and of ourselves as belonging to it, and to 
believe that all the misfortunes due to our  own mistakes are really the work of the Foreigner. It is easier to feel 
violently toward a person than toward an abstraction; hence our habi t of making political personifications. In some 
cases military personifications are merely  special instances of political personifications. A particular collectivity, 
the army or the warring nation, is given the name and, al ong with the name, the attributes of a single person, in 
order that we may be able to love or hate it more intensel y than we could do if we thought  of it as what it really is: 
a number of diverse individuals. In other cases pers onification is used for th e purpose of concealing the 
fundamental absurdity and monstrosity of war. What is ab surd and monstrous about war is that men who have no 
personal quarrel should be trained to murder one anot her in cold blood. By personifying opposing armies or 
countries, we are able to think of war as a conflict be tween individuals. The same re sult is obtained by writing of 
war as though it were carried on exclusiv ely by the generals in command and not by the private soldiers in their 
armies. ("Rennenkampf had pressed back von Schubert." ) The implication in both cases is that war is 
indistinguishable from a bout of fis ticuffs in a bar room. Whereas in r eality it is profoundly different. A scrap 
between two individuals is forgivable; mass murder, delib erately organized, is a mons trous iniquity. We still 
choose to use war as an instrument of policy; and to comprehend the full wickedness and absurdity of war would 
therefore be inconvenient. For, once we understood, we s hould have to make some effort to get rid of the 
abominable thing. Accordingly, when we talk about war,  we use a language which conceals or embellishes its 
reality. Ignoring the facts, so far as we  possibly can, we imply that battles ar e not fought by soldiers, but by things, 
principles, allegories, personified co llectivities, or (at the most human) by opposing commanders, pitched against 
one another in single combat. For the sa me reason, when we have to describe the processes and the results of war, 
we employ a rich variety of euphemisms.  Even the most violently patriotic a nd militaristic are reluctant to call a 
spade by its own name. To conceal their intentions even from themselves, they make use of picturesque metaphors. 
We find them, for example, clamoring for war planes  numerous and powerful enough to go and "destroy the 
hornets in their nests" -- in other words, to go and throw thermite, high explosives and vesicants upon the 
inhabitants of neighboring countries befo re they have time to come and do the same to us. And how reassuring is 
the language of historians and strategists! They write admiringly of those military geniuses who know "when to 
strike at the enemy's line" (a single combatant deranges the geometrical constructions of a personification); when 
to "turn his flank"; when to "execute an enveloping movement." As  though they were engineers discussing the 
strength of materials and the distribution of stresses,  they talk of abst ract entities called "m an power" and "fire 
power." They sum up the long-drawn sufferings and atrocities  of trench warfare in the phrase, "a war of attrition"; 
the massacre and mangling of human beings is assimilated to the grinding of a lens. 
 A dangerously abstract word, which figures in all discussions about war,  is "force." Those who believe in 
organizing collective security by means of military pacts ag ainst a possible aggressor are particularly fond of this 
word. "You cannot," they say, "have in ternational justice unle ss you are prepared to im pose it by force." "Peace-
loving countries must unite to use force against aggres sive dictatorships." "Democratic institutions must be 
protected, if need be, by force." And so on. 
 Now, the word "force," when used in reference to hu man relations, has no single, definite meaning. There is 
the "force" used by parents when, without resort to any kind of physical violence , they compel their children to act 
or refrain from acting in some particular way. There is the "force" used by attendants in an asylum when they try to 
prevent a maniac from hurting himself or others. There is the "force" used by the police when they control a crowd,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

130
and that other "force" which they used in a baton charge. And finally there is the "for ce" used in war. This, of 
course, varies with the technological devices at the disposal of the belligerents, with the policies they are pursuing, 
and with the particular circumstances of the war in question. But in general it may be said that, in war, "force" 
connotes violence and fraud used to the limit of the combatants' capacity. 
 Variations in quantity, if sufficiently great, produ ce variations in quality. The "force" that is war, 
particularly modern war, is very different from the "force" that is po lice action, and the use of the same abstract 
word to describe the two dissimilar processes is profoundly misleading. (Still more misleading, of course, is the 
explicit assimilation of a war, waged by allied League-of-Nations powers ag ainst an aggressor, to police action 
against a criminal. The first is the us e of violence and fraud w ithout limit against innocen t and guilty alike; the 
second is the use of strictly limited violence and a minimum of fraud exclusively against the guilty.) 
 Reality is a succession of concrete a nd particular situations. When we think about such situations we should 
use the particular and concrete words which apply to them. If we use abstract  words which apply equally well (and 
equally badly) to other, quite dissimilar situations, it is certain that we shall think incorrectly. 
 Let us take the sentences quoted above and translate th e abstract word "force" into language that will render 
(however inadequately) the concrete and particular realities of contemporary warfare. 
 "You cannot have international justice, unless you ar e prepared to impose it by force." Translated, this 
becomes: "You cannot have international justice unless you are prepared, with a view to imposing a just settlement, 
to drop thermite, high explosives and vesicants upon the inha bitants of foreign cities and to have thermite, high 
explosives and vesicants droppe d in return upon the inhabitants of your cities." At the end of this proceeding, 
justice is to be imposed by the victorious  party -- that is, if ther e is a victorious party. It  should be remarked that 
justice was to have been imposed by the victorious party at the e nd of the last war. But, unfortunately, after four 
years of fighting, the temper of the victors was such that they were quite incapable of making a just settlement. The 
Allies are reaping in Nazi Germany what they sowed at Versailles. The victors of the next war will have undergone 
intensive bombardments with thermite, high explosives and vesicants. Will their temper be better than that of the 
Allies in 1918? Will they be in a fitter state to make a just settlement? The answer, quite obviously, is: No. It is 
psychologically all but impossible that justice should be secured by the methods of contemporary warfare. 
 The next two sentences may be taken together. "P eace-loving countries must un ite to use force against 
aggressive dictatorships. Democratic institutions must be protected, if need be, by force." Let us translate. "Peace-
loving countries must unite to throw thermite, high explos ives and vesicants on the inhabitants of countries ruled 
by aggressive dictators. They must do this, and of course abide the conseque nces, in order to preserve peace and 
democratic institutions." Two questions immediately pr opound themselves. First, is it likely that peace can be 
secured by a process calculated to reduce the orderly life of our complicated societies to chaos? And, second, is it 
likely that democratic institutions will flourish in a state of chaos? Again, the answers are pretty clearly in the 
negative. 
 By using the abstract word "force," instead of terms whic h at least attempt to describe the realities of war as 
it is today, the preachers of collective security through milita ry collaboration disguise from themselves and from 
others, not only the contemporary facts, but also the probable consequences of their favorite policy. The attempt to 
secure justice, peace and democracy by "force" seems r easonable enough until we realize, first, that this 
noncommittal word stands, in the circumst ances of our age, for activ ities which can hardly fail  to result in social 
chaos; and second, that the consequen ces of social chaos are injustice, chronic warfare and tyranny. The moment 
we think in concrete and particular terms of the concrete and particular process called "modern war," we see that a 
policy which worked (or at least didn't result in complete disaster) in the past has no pr ospect whatever of working 
in the immediate future. The attempt to secure justice, peace and democracy by means of a "force," which means, 
at this particular moment of  history, thermite, high explos ives and vesicants, is about as reasonable as the attempt 
to put out a fire with a colorless liquid that happens to be, not water, but petrol. 
 What applies to the "force" that is war applies in la rge measure to the "force" that is revolution. It seems 
inherently very unlikely that social justice and social peace can be secu red by thermite, high  explosives and 
vesicants. At first, it may be, the parties in a civil wa r would hesitate to use such  instruments on their fellow-
countrymen. But there can be little doubt that, if the conf lict were prolonged (as it probably would be between the 
evenly balanced Right and Left of a highly industrialized so ciety), the combatants would end by losing their 
scruples.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

131
 The alternatives confronting us seem to be plai n enough. Either we invent an d conscientiously employ a 
new technique for making revolutions and settling international disputes; or else we cling to the old technique and, 
using "force" (that is to say, thermite , high explosives and vesicants), dest roy ourselves. Those who, for whatever 
motive, disguise the nature of the second alternative under inappropriate language,  render the world a grave 
disservice. They lead us into one of the temptations we find it hardest to resist -- the temptation to run away from 
reality, to pretend that facts are not what they are. Like Shelley (but w ithout Shelley's acute awareness of what he 
was doing) we are perpetually weaving 
 
 A shroud of talk to hide us from the sun  
 Of this familiar life.  
 
We protect our minds by an elaborate system of abstrac tions, ambiguities, metaphors and similes from the reality 
we do not wish to know too clearly; we lie to ourselves, in order that we may still have the excuse of ignorance, the 
alibi of stupidity and incomprehens ion, possessing which we can continue with a good conscience to commit and 
tolerate the most monstrous crimes: 
 
 The poor wretch who has learned his only prayers 
 From curses, who knows scarcely words enough 
 To ask a blessing from his Heavenly Father, 
 Becomes a fluent phraseman, absolute 
 And technical in victories and defeats, 
 And all our dainty terms for fratricide; 
 Terms which we trundle smoothly o'er our tongues 
 Like mere abstractions, empty sounds to which 
 We join no meaning and attach no form! 
 As if the soldier died without a wound: 
 As if the fibers of this godlike frame 
 Were gored without a pang: as if the wretch 
 Who fell in battle, doing bloody deeds, 
 Passed off to Heaven translated and not killed; 
 As though he had no wife to pine for him, 
 No God to judge him. 
 
 The language we use about war is inappropriate, and its inappropriateness is designed to conceal a reality so 
odious that we do not wish to know it. The language we use about politics is also inappropriate; but here our 
mistake has a different purpose. Our principal aim in this  case is to arouse and, ha ving aroused, to rationalize and 
justify such intrinsically agreeable sentiments as pride and hatred, self-e steem and contempt for others. To achieve 
this end we speak about the facts of politics in words which more or less completely misrepresent them. 
 The concrete realities of politics are individual huma n beings, living together in national groups. Politicians 
-- and to some extent we are all politicians -- substitute ab stractions for these concrete  realities, and having done 
this, proceed to invest each abstraction with an appear ance of concreteness by personifying it. For example, the 
concrete reality of which "B ritain" is the abstraction consists of so me forty-odd millions of diverse individuals 
living on an island off the west coast of Europe. The personification of this ab straction appears, in classical fancy-
dress and holding a very large toasting fork, on the backside  of our copper coinage; app ears in verbal form, every 
time we talk about international politics.  "Britain," the abstraction from forty millions of Britons, is endowed with 
thoughts, sensibilities and emotions, even with a sex -- for, in spite of John Bull, the country is always a female. 
 Now, it is of course possible that "Britain" is more than a mere name -- is an entity that possesses some 
kind of reality distinct from that of the individuals constituting the group to which the name is applied. But this 
entity, if it exists, is certainly not  a young lady with a toasting fork; nor is it possible to believe (though some 
eminent philosophers have preached th e doctrine) that it should possess anythi ng in the nature of  a personal will. 
One must agree with T. H. Green that "there can be nothing in a nation, however exalted its mission, or in a society 
however perfectly organized, which is  not in the persons composing the nation or the society. . . We cannot 
suppose a national spirit and will to exis t except as the spirit a nd will of individuals." But the moment we start 
resolutely thinking about our world in terms of individual persons we find our selves at the same time thinking in

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

132
terms of universality. "The  great rational religions," writes Profe ssor Whitehead, "are the outcome of the 
emergence of a religious consciousness th at is universal, as disti nguished from tribal, or even social. Because it is 
universal, it introduces the note of solitar iness." (And he might have added that, because it is solitary, it introduces 
the note of universality.) "The reason of this connection between universality and solitude is that universality is a 
disconnection from immediate surroundings." And convers ely the disconnection from immediate surroundings, 
particularly such social surrounding as  the tribe or nation, the insistence on the person as the fundamental reality, 
leads to the conception of an all-embracing unity. 
 A nation, then, may be more than a mere abstraction, may possess some kind of real existence apart from its 
constituent members. But there is no reason to suppose that  it is a person; indeed, there is every reason to suppose 
that it isn't. Those who speak as though it were a person (and some go further th an this and speak as though it were 
a personal god) do so, because it is to their interest as egotists to make precisely this mistake. 
 In the case of the ruling class these interests are in  part material. The personi fication of the nation as a 
sacred being, different from and superior to its constituen t members, is merely (I quote the words of a great French 
jurist, Léon Duguit) "a way of imposing author ity by making people believe it is an authority de jure and not 
merely de facto." By habitually talking of the nation as though it were a person with thoughts, feelings and a will of 
its own, the rulers of a country legitimate their own power s. Personification leads easily to deification; and where 
the nation is deified, its government ceases to be a mere convenience, lik e drains or a telephone system, and, 
partaking in the sacredness of the entity it represents, claims to give orders by divine right and demands the 
unquestioning obedience due to a god. Rulers seldom find it hard to recognize their friends. Hegel, the man who 
elaborated an inappropriate figure of speech into a comp lete philosophy of politics, was a favorite of the Prussian 
government. "Es ist," he had written, "es ist der Gang Gottes in der Welt, das der Staat ist." The decoration 
bestowed on him by Frederick William III was richly deserved. 
 Unlike their rulers, the ruled have no material interest in using inappr opriate language about states and 
nations. For them, the reward of being mistaken is psyc hological. The personified and deified nation becomes, in 
the minds of the individuals composing it, a kind of en largement of themselves. The superhuman qualities which 
belong to the young lady with the toasting fo rk, the young lady with plaits and a brass soutien-gorge, the young 
lady in a Phrygian bonnet, are claimed by individual Englishmen, Germans and Frenchmen as being, at least in 
part, their own. Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori. But there would be no need to die, no need of war, if it had 
not been even sweeter to boast  and swagger for one's country, to hate, desp ise, swindle and bully for it. Loyalty to 
the personified nation, or to the personifi ed class or party, justifies the loyal in indulging all t hose passions which 
good manners and the moral code do not allow them to di splay in their relations with their neighbors. The 
personified entity is a being, not only great and noble, but also insanely  proud, vain and touchy; fiercely rapacious; 
a braggart; bound by no considerations of right and wrong. (Hegel condemned as hopelessly shallow all those who 
dared to apply ethical standards to the activities of na tions. To condone and applaud every iniquity committed in 
the name of the State was to him a sign of philosophical prof undity.) Identifying them selves with this god, 
individuals find relief from th e constraints of ordinary social decency, feel themselves justified in giving rein, 
within duly prescribed limits, to their criminal procliviti es. As a loyal nationalist or party-man, one can enjoy the 
luxury of behaving badly with a good conscience.  
 The evil passions are further justified by another lingui stic error -- the error of speaking about certain 
categories of persons as though they were  mere embodied abstractions. Foreigne rs and those who disagree with us 
are not thought of as men and women like ourselves and our fellow-countrymen; they are thought of as 
representatives and, so to say, symbols of a class. In so fa r as they have any personality at all, it is the personality 
we mistakenly attribute to their class -- a personality th at is, by definition, intrinsica lly evil. We know that the 
harming or killing of men and women is wrong, and we are reluctant consciously to do what we know to be wrong. 
But when particular men and women are thought of merely as representatives of a class, which has previously been 
defined as evil and personified in the shape of a devil, then the reluctance to hurt or murder disappears. Brown, 
Jones and Robinson are no longer thought of as Brown, J ones and Robinson, but as heretics, gentiles, Yids, 
niggers, barbarians, Huns, communists, capitalists, fascists, liberals -- whichever the case may be. When they have 
been called such names and assim ilated to the accursed class to whic h the names apply, Brown, Jones and 
Robinson cease to be conceived as what they really are --  human persons -- and become for the users of this fatally 
inappropriate language mere vermin or, worse, demons whom it is right and proper to destroy as thoroughly and as

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

133
painfully as possible. Wherever persons are present, questions of morality arise. Rulers of nations and leaders of 
parties find morality embarrassing. That is why they take such pains to depersonalize their opponents. All 
propaganda directed against an opposing group has but one aim: to substitute diabolical abstractions for concrete 
persons. The propagandist's purpose is to make one set of people forget that certain other sets of people are human. 
By robbing them of their personality, he puts them outside the pale of moral obligation. Mere symbols can have no 
rights -- particularly when that of which they are symbolical is, by definition, evil. 
 Politics can become moral only on one condition: that  its problems shall be spoken of and thought about 
exclusively in terms of concrete reality; that is to say, of persons. To depersonify human beings and to personify 
abstractions are complementary errors which lead, by an inexorable logic, to war between nations and to idolatrous 
worship of the State, with consequent governmental oppression. All current political thought is a mixture, in 
varying proportions, between thought in terms of concrete realities and thought  in terms of depersonified symbols 
and personified abstractions. In the democratic countries the problems of internal politics are thought about mainly 
in terms of concrete reality; those of external politics, ma inly in terms of abstractions and symbols. In dictatorial 
countries the proportion of conc rete to abstract and sym bolic thought is lower than  in democratic countries. 
Dictators talk little of persons, much of personified abstra ctions, such as the Nation, the State, the Party, and much 
of depersonified symbols, such as Yids, Bolshies, Capitalists. The stupidity of politicians who talk about a world of 
persons as though it were not a world of persons is due in th e main to self-interest. In a fictitious world of symbols 
and personified abstractions, rulers fi nd that they can rule more effectivel y, and the ruled, that they can gratify 
instincts which the conventions of good manners and the im peratives of morality demand that they should repress. 
To think correctly is the condition of behaving well. It is also in itself a moral act; those who would think correctly 
must resist considerable temptations. 
(From The Olive Tree) 
 
 
 
Decentralization and Self-Government 
 
 The Anarchists propose that the state should be abolishe d; and in so far as it serves as the instrument by 
means of which the ruling class preserves its privileges; in so far as it is a device for enabling paranoiacs to satisfy 
their lust for power and carry out their crazy dreams of  glory, the state is obviously worthy of abolition. But in 
complex societies like our own the state has certain other and more useful func tions to perform. It is clear, for 
example, that in any such society there must be some organization responsible for co-ordinating the activities of the 
various constituent groups; clear, too, that there must be a body to which is delegated the power of acting in the 
name of the society as a whole. If the word "state" is too unpleasantly associated with ideas of domestic oppression 
and foreign war, with irresponsible do mination and no less irres ponsible submission, then by all means let us call 
the necessary social machinery by some other name. For the present there is no general agreement as to what that 
name should be; I shall therefore go on using the bad old word, until some better one is invented. 
 No economic reform, however intrinsically desirable, can lead to desirable changes in individuals and the 
society they constitute, unless it is carried through in a desirable context a nd by desirable methods. So far as the 
state is concerned, the desirable context for reform is decentralization and self-government all round. The desirable 
methods for enacting reform are the methods of non-violence. 
 Passing from the general to the particular and the c oncrete, the rational idealist finds himself confronted by 
the following questions. First, by what means can the princi ple of self-government be a pplied to the daily lives of 
men and women? Second, to what extent  is the self-government of the component parts of a society compatible 
with its efficiency as a whole? And, thir dly, if a central organization is needed  to coordinate th e activities of the 
self-governing parts, what is to prev ent this organization from becoming a ru ling oligarchy of the kind with which 
we are only too painfully familiar? 
 The technique for self-government all round, self- government for ordinary pe ople in their ordinary 
avocation, is a matter which we cannot profitably discuss un less we have a clear idea of what may be called the 
natural history and psychology of groups. Quantitatively, a group differs from a crowd in size; qualitatively, in the 
kind and intensity of the mental life of  the constituent individuals. A crowd is a lot of people; a group is a few. A

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

134
crowd has a mental life inferior in in tellectual quality and emotionally less under voluntary control than the mental 
life of each of its members in  isolation. The mental life of a group is not inferior, either intellectually or 
emotionally, to the mental life of the individual composin g it and may, in favorable circumstances, actually be 
superior. 
 The significant psychological facts about the crowd are as follows. The tone of crowd emotion is essentially 
orgiastic and dionysiac. In virtue of hi s membership of the crowd, the individua l is released from the limitations of 
his personality, made free of the sub-pe rsonal, sub-human world of unrestrained feeling and uncriticized belief. To 
be a member of a crowd is an experience closely akin to  alcoholic intoxication. Most human beings feel a craving 
to escape from the cramping limitations of  their ego, to take periodical holiday s from their all too familiar, all too 
squalid little selves. As they do not know how to travel upwards from personality into a region of super-personality 
and as they are unwilling, even if they do know, to fulfill the ethical, psychological and physiological conditions of 
self-transcendence, they turn naturally  to the descending road, the road that  leads down from personality to the 
darkness of sub-human emotionalism and panic anima lity. Hence the persistent craving for narcotics and 
stimulants, hence the never failing attr action of the crowd. The success of the di ctators is due in large measure to 
their extremely skillful expl oitation of the universal human need for escape from the limitations of personality. 
Perceiving that people wished to take holidays from themselves in sub-human emotionality, they have 
systematically provided their subjects with the occasi ons for doing so. The Communis ts denounce religion as the 
opium of the people; but all they have done is to repl ace this old drug by a new one of similar composition. For the 
crowd round the relic of the saint they have substituted the crowd at the political meeting; for religious processions, 
military reviews and May Day parades. It is the same with Fa scist dictators. In all the totalitarian states the masses 
are persuaded, and, even compelled, to take periodical hol idays from themselves in the sub-human world of crowd 
emotion. It is significant that while they encourage and actually command the de scent into sub-humanity, the 
dictators do all they can to prevent men from taking the upward road fr om personal limitation, the road that leads 
toward non-attachment to the "things of  this world" and attachment to that  which is super-personal. The higher 
manifestations of religion are far more suspect to the tyrants than the lower -- and with reason. For the man who 
escapes from egotism into super-personality has transcended his old idolatrous loyalty, not only to himself, but also 
to the local divinities -- nation, party, class, deified boss. Self-transcendence, escape from the prison of the ego into 
union with what is above personality, is  generally accomplished in solitude. Th at is why the tyrants like to herd 
their subjects into those vast crowds, in which the individual is reduced to a state of intoxicated sub-humanity. 
 It is time now to consider the group. The first ques tion we must ask ourselves is  this: when does a group 
become a crowd? This is not a problem in verbal definition; it is a matter of observation and experience. It is found 
empirically that group activiti es and characteristic group feeling become increasingly difficult when more than 
about twenty or less than about five  individuals are involved. Groups which come togeth er for the purpose of 
carrying out a specific job of manual wo rk can afford to be larger than groups which meet for the purpose of 
pooling information and elaborating a common policy, or wh ich meet for religious exercises, or for mutual 
comfort, or merely for the sake of c onvivially "getting together." Twenty or  even as many as thirty people can 
work together and still remain a group. But these numbers  would be much too high in  a group that had assembled 
for the other purposes I have mentioned. It  is significant that Jesus had only tw elve apostles; that the Benedictines 
were divided into groups of ten under a dean (Latin decanus from Greek 
  ten); that ten is the number of 
individuals constituting a Communist cell. Committees of more than a dozen members are found to be 
unmanageably large. Eight is the perfect number for a dinner party. The most successful Quaker meetings are 
generally meetings at which few people are present. Educationists agree that the most satisfactory size for a class is 
between eight and fifteen. In armies, the smallest unit is  about ten. The witches' "coven" was a group of thirteen. 
And so on. All evidence points clearly to the fact that there is an  optimum size for groups and that this optimum is 
round about ten for groups meeting for social, religious or intellectual purposes and from ten to thirty for groups 
engaged in manual work. This being so, it is clear that  the units of self-government should be groups of the 
optimum size. If they are smaller than the optimum, they will fail to develop that emotional field which gives to 
group activity its characteristic quality, while the availabl e quantity of pooled information and experience will be 
inadequate. If they are larger than the optimum, they will tend to split into sub-groups of the optimum size or, if the 
constituent individuals remain together  in a crowd there will be a danger of  their relapsing into the crowd's sub-
human stupidity and emotionality.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

135
 The technique of industrial self-government has been discussed with a wealth of concrete examples in a 
remarkable book by the French economi st Hyacinthe Dubreuil, entitled, A Chacun sa Chance. Among the writers 
on industrial organization Dubreu il occupies a place apart; for he is almost the only one of them who has himself 
had experience of factory conditions as a workman. Accordingly, what he writes on the subject of industrial 
organization carries an author ity denied to the utterances  of those who rely on second -hand information as a basis 
for their theories. Dubreuil points out that even the largest industries can be organized so as to consist of a series of 
self-governing, yet co-ordinated, groups of, at the outside, thirty members. Within the industry each one of such 
groups can act as a kind of sub-contractor, undertaking to  perform so much of such and such a kind of work for 
such and such a sum. The equitable division of this sum among the constituent members is left to the group itself, 
as is also the preservation of disciplin e, the election of representatives and leaders. The examples which Dubreuil 
quotes from the annals of industrial history and from his own experience as a workman tend to show that this form 
of organization is appreciated by the workers, to whom it gives a measur e of independence even within the largest 
manufacturing concern, and th at in most cases it re sults in increased efficiency of  working. It possesses, as he 
points out, the further merit of being a form of organization that educates thos e who belong to it in the practice of 
co-operation and mutual responsibility. 
 Under the present dispensation, the great majority of  factories are little des potisms, benevolent in some 
cases, malevolent in others. Even where benevolence prev ails, passive obedience is demanded of the workers, who 
are ruled by overseers, not of their own election, but appointed from above. In theory, they may be the subjects of a 
democratic state; but in practice they  spend the whole of  their working lives as the subjects of a petty tyrant. 
Dubreuil's scheme, if it were genera lly acted upon, would introduce genuine democracy into the factory. And if 
some such scheme is not acted upon, it is of small moment  to the individual whether th e industry in which he is 
working is owned by the state,  by a co-operative societ y, by a joint stock company or  by a private individual. 
Passive obedience to officers appointed  from above is always passive obedi ence, whoever the general in ultimate 
control may be. Conversely, even if the ultimate control is in the wrong hands, the man who voluntarily accepts 
rules in the making of which he has had a part, who obeys leaders he himself has chosen, who has helped to decide 
how much and in what conditions he hi mself and his companions shall be pa id, is to that extent the free and 
responsible subject of a genui nely democratic government, and enjoys those psychological advantages which only 
such a form of government can give. 
 Of modern wage-slaves, Lenin writes  that they "remain to such an exte nt crushed by want and poverty that 
they 'can't be bothered with democracy,' have 'no time for politics,' and in the ordinary peaceful course of events, 
the majority of the population is debarred from particip ating in public political life ." This statement is only 
partially true. Not all those who can't be bothered with democracy are debarred from political life by want and 
poverty. Plenty of well-paid workmen and, for that matter, plenty of  the wealthiest benefici aries of the capitalistic 
system, find that they can't be bothered with politics. The reason is not economic, but psychological; has its source, 
not in environment, but in heredity. People belong to di fferent psycho-physiological types and are endowed with 
different degrees of general intelligence.  The will and ability to take an eff ective interest in large-scale politics do 
not belong to all, or even a majority  of, men and women. Preoccupation with general ideas, with things and people 
distant in space, with contingent events remote in future time, is something which it is given to only a few to feel. 
"What's Hecuba to him or he to Hecuba?" The answer in  most cases is: Nothing whatsoever. An improvement in 
the standard of living might perceptibly increase the number of those for whom Hecuba meant something. But even 
if all were rich, there woul d still be many congenitally in capable of being bothered with  anything so far removed 
from the warm, tangible facts of everyday experience. As th ings are at present, millions of men and women come 
into the world disfranchised by nature. They have the privilege of voting on long-range, large-scale political issues; 
but they are congenitally incapable of taking an intelligent inte rest in any but short-ra nge, small-scale problems. 
Too often the framers of democratic  constitutions have acted as thou gh man were made for democracy, not 
democracy for man. The vote has been a kind of bed of Procrustes upon which, however long their views, however 
short their ability, all human beings were expected to stretch themselves. Not unnaturally, the results of this kind of 
democracy have proved disappointing. Nevertheless, it remains true that democratic freedom is good for those who 
enjoy it and that practice in self-government is an almo st indispensable element in the curriculum of man's moral 
and psychological education. Human beings belong to different  types; it is therefore nece ssary to create different 
types of democratic and self-governing institutions, suitable for the various kinds of men and women. Thus, people

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

136
with short-range, small-scale interests can find scope for their kind of political abilities in self-governing groups 
within an industry, within a consumer or producer cooperative, within the admi nistrative machinery of the parish, 
borough or county. By means of compara tively small changes in the existing systems of local and professional 
organization it would be possible to ma ke almost every individual a member of some self-governing group. In this 
way the curse of merely passive obedience could be got  rid of, the vice of politic al indolence cured and the 
advantages of responsible and active freedom brought to all. In this cont ext it is worth remarking on a very 
significant change which has recently taken place in our so cial habits. Materially, this  change may be summed up 
as the decline of the community; psychologically, as the decline of the community sense. The reasons for this 
double change are many and of various kinds. Here are a few of the more important. 
 Birth control has reduced the size of the average fa mily and, for various reasons which will be apparent 
later, the old habits of patriarchal li ving have practically disappeared. It is  very rare nowadays to find parents, 
married children, and grandchildren living together in th e same house or in close association. Large families and 
patriarchal groups were communities in which children and adults had to lear n (often by very painful means) the 
art of co-operation and the need to accept responsibility for others. These admittedly rather crude schools of 
community sense have now disappeared. 
 New methods of transport have pr ofoundly modified the life in the village and small town. Up to only a 
generation ago most villages were to a great extent self-sufficing comm unities. Every trade was represented by its 
local technician; the local produce was consumed or exchanged in the neighborhood; the inhabitants worked on the 
spot. If they desired instruction or entertainment or religion, they had to mobilize the local talent and produce it 
themselves. Today all this is  changed. Thanks to improved transport, the village is now closely bound up with the 
rest of the economic world. Supplies a nd technical services are obtained from a distance.  Large numbers of the 
inhabitants go out to work in factories and offices in far-off cities. Music and the drama are provided, not by local 
talent, but over the ether and in the picture theater. Once all the members of the community were always on the 
spot; now, thanks to cars, motor cycl es and buses the villagers are rarely  in their village. Community fun, 
community worship, community efforts to secure culture have tended to decline for the simple reason that, in 
leisure hours, a large part of the community's membership is always somewhere else. Nor is this all. The older 
inhabitants of Middletown, as readers of the Lynds' classical study of Ameri can small-town life will remember, 
complained that the internal combusti on engine had led to a decline of ne ighborliness. Neighbors have Fords and 
Chevrolets, consequently are no longer there to be neighborly; or if by chance they should be at home, they content 
themselves with calling up on the te lephone. Technological progress has reduced  the number of physical contacts, 
and thus impoverished the spiritual relations between the members of a community. 
 Centralized professionalism has not only affected local entertainment; it had also affected the 
manifestations of local charity and mutual aid. State- provided hospitals, state-pr ovided medical and nursing 
services are certainly much more effici ent than the ministra tions of the neighbors. But this increased efficiency is 
purchased at the price of a certain te ndency on the part of neighbors to discla im liability for one another and throw 
their responsibilities entirely upon th e central authority. Under a perfectly organized system of state socialism 
charity would be, not merely superfluous , but actually criminal. Good Samarita ns would be prosecuted for daring 
to interfere in their bungling amateurish way with what was obviously a case for state-paid professionals. 
 The last three generations have witnessed a vast increase in the size and number of large cities. Life is more 
exciting and more money can be earned in the cities than in villages and small towns. Hence the migration from 
country to city. In the van of this migrating host have  marched the ambitious, the ta lented, the adventurous. For 
more than a century, there has been a tendency for the mo st gifted members of small rural communities to leave 
home and seek their fortune in the to wns. Consequently what remains in th e villages and country towns of the 
industrialized countries is in the natu re of a residual population, dysgenically selected for its lack of spirit and 
intellectual gifts. Why is it so hard to induce peasants  and small farmers to adopt new scientific methods? Among 
other reasons, because almost every ex ceptionally intelligent child born into a rural family for a century past has 
taken the earliest opportunity of deserting the land for the city. Community life in the country is thus impoverished; 
but (and this is the important point) th e community life of the great urban cen ters is not correspondingly enriched. 
It is not enriched for the good reason that, in growing e normous, cities have also grown chaotic. A metropolitan 
"wen," as Cobbett was already calling th e relatively tiny London of his day, is  no longer an organic whole, no 
longer exists as a community, in whose life individuals ca n fruitfully participate. Men and women rub shoulders

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

137
with other men and women; but the contact is external a nd mechanical. Each one of them can say, in the words of 
the Jolly Miller of the song, "I care for nobody, no, not I, and nobody cares for me." Metr opolitan life is atomistic. 
The city, as a city, does nothing to correlate its human pa rticles into a pattern of responsible, communal living. 
What the country loses on the swings, the city loses all over again on the roundabouts. 
 In the light of this statement of the principal reas ons for the recent decline of the community and of the 
community sense in individuals, we can suggest certain remedies. Schools and colleges can be transformed into 
organic communities and used to offset, during a short period of the individual's career, the decay in family and 
village life. (A very intere sting experiment in this di rection is being made at Bl ack Mountain College in North 
Carolina.) To some extent, no doubt, the old, "natural" life of villages and small towns, the life that the economic, 
technological and religious circumst ances of the past cons pired to impose upon them , can be replaced by a 
consciously designed synthe tic product -- a life of asso ciations organized for loca l government, for sport, for 
cultural activities and th e like. Such associations alr eady exist, and there should be no great difficulty in opening 
them to larger numbers and, at the same time, in making th eir activities so interesting th at people will wish to join 
them instead of taking the line of  least resistance, as they do now, a nd living unconnected, atomistic lives, 
passively obeying during thei r working hours and passively allowing themselves to be entertained by machinery 
during their hours of leis ure. The existence of associations of this kind would serve to ma ke country life less dull 
and so do something to arrest the flight toward the city. At the same time, the decentr alization of industry and its 
association with agriculture should make it possible for the countryman to earn as much as the city dweller. In spite 
of the ease with which electric power can now be distributed, the movement toward the decentralization of industry 
is not yet a very powerful one. Great centers of populati on, like London and Paris, possess an enormous power of 
attraction to industries. The greater the population, the greater the market; a nd the greater the market, the stronger 
the gravitational pull exercised upon the manufacturer. New industries estab lish themselves on the outskirts of 
large cities and make them become stil l larger. For the sake of slight increased profits, due to lower distributing 
costs, the manufacturers are busily engaged in making London chaotically large, hopelessly congested, desperately 
hard to enter or leave,  and vulnerable to air at tacks as no other city of Europe is  vulnerable. To compel a rational 
and planned decentralization of industry is one of the legitimate, the urgently necessary functions of the state.  
 Life in the great city is atomis tic. How shall it be given a communal pattern? How shall the individual be 
incorporated in a responsible, sel f-governing group? In a mode rn city, the problem of  organizing responsible 
community life on a local basis is not easily solved. Mode rn cities have been created and are preserved by the 
labors of highly specialized technicians.  The massacre of a few thousands of e ngineers, administrators and doctors 
would be sufficient to reduce any of the great metropolitan centers to a state of plague-stricken, starving chaos. 
Accordingly, in most of its branches , the local government of a great city has become a highly technical affair, a 
business of the kind that must be centrally planned and car ried out by experts. The only  department in which there 
would seem to be a possibility of profitably extending the existing institutio ns of local self-government is the 
department concerned with police-work and the observance of laws. I have read that in Ja pan, the cities were, and 
perhaps still are, divided into wards of about a hundred inhabitants apiece. The people in each ward accepted a 
measure of liability for one another a nd were to some extent responsible for good behavior and the observance of 
law within their own small unit. That such a system lends  itself to the most monstrous abuses under a dictatorial 
government is obvious. Indeed, it is reported that the Nazis have already organized their cities in this way. But 
there is no governmental institution that cannot be abused. Elected parliaments have been used as instruments of 
oppression; plebiscites have served to confirm and strengthe n tyranny; courts of justice have been transformed into 
Star Chambers and military tribunals. Like all the rest, the ward system may be a source of good in a desirable 
context and a source of unmitigated evil in an undesira ble context. It remains in any case a device worth 
considering by those who aspire to impose a communal pattern upon the atomistic, irresponsible life of modern city 
dwellers. For the rest, it looks as though the townsman's main experience of democratic institutions and responsible 
self-government would have to be obt ained, not in local administrations, but in the fields of industry and 
economics, of religious and cultural activity, of athletics and entertainment. 
 In the preceding paragraphs I have tr ied to answer the first of our questions and have described the methods 
by which the principle of self-government can be applie d to the daily lives of ordinary men and women. Our 
second question concerns the compatibil ity of self-government all round with the effici ency of industry in 
particular and society as a whole. In Russia self-government in industry was tried in the ea rly years of the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

138
revolution and was abandoned in favor of authoritarian management. Within  the factory discipline is no longer 
enforced by elected representatives of the Soviet or worker's committee,  but by appointees of the Communist 
Party. The new conception of management current in S oviet Russia was summed up by Kaganovitch in a speech 
before the seventeenth congress of the Communist Party. "Management," he said, "means the power to distribute 
material things, to appoint and discharge subordinates, in a word, to be master of  the particular enterprise." This is 
a definition of management to whic h every industrial dictator in the cap italist countries would unhesitatingly 
subscribe. 
 By supporters of the present Russian government it is said that the change over from self-government to 
authoritarian management had to be ma de in the interests of efficiency. That extremely inexperienced and ill-
educated workers should have been unable to govern th emselves and keep up industrial efficiency seems likely 
enough. But in Western Europe and the Unit ed States such a situation is not likely to arise. In deed, Dubreuil has 
pointed out that, as a matter of hist orical fact, self-government within factories has often led to increased 
efficiency. It would seem, then, that in countries where all me n and women are relatively well educated and have 
been accustomed for some time to the working of democrat ic institutions, there is no danger that self-government 
will lead to a breakdown of discipline within the factor y or a decline in output. But, like "liberty" the word 
"efficiency" covers a multitude of sins. Even if it shoul d be irrefragably demonstrated that self-government in 
industry invariably led to a greater contentment and increased output, even if it could be proved experimentally that 
the best features of individualism and collectivism could be  combined if the state were to co-ordinate the activities 
of self-governing industries , there would still be comp laints of "inefficiency." And by their own lights, the 
complainers would be quite right. For to the ruling classes,  not only in the totalitarian, but also in the democratic 
countries, "efficiency" means primarily "military efficiency." Now, a societ y in which the principle of self-
government has been applied to the ordi nary activities of all its members, is  a society which, for purely military 
purposes, is probably decidedly inefficient. A militarily efficient society is one whose members have been brought 
up in habits of passive obedi ence and at the head of which there is an  individual exercising absolute authority 
through a perfectly trained hierarchy of administrators. In time of war, such  a society can be manipulated as a 
single unit and with extraordinary rapi dity and precision. A society composed  of men and women habituated to 
working in self-governing groups is not a perfect war-machine. Its members may think and have wills of their own. 
But soldiers must not think nor have wills. "Theirs not to r eason why; theirs but to do and die." Furthermore a 
society in which authority is decentralized, a society compos ed of co-ordinated but self-governing parts, cannot be 
manipulated so swiftly and certainly as a totalitarian society under a dictator. Self-government all round is not 
compatible with military efficiency. So long as nations pe rsist in using war as an instrument of policy, military 
efficiency will be prized above all else. Therefore sche mes for extending the principle of self-government will 
either not be tried at all or, if tried, as in Russia,  will be speedily abandoned. In evitably, we find ourselves 
confronted, yet once more, by the central evil of our time, the overpowering and increasing evil of war. 
 I must now try to answer our questio ns concerning the efficiency of a society made up of co-ordinated self-
governing units and the nature of the co-ordinating body. 
 Dubreuil has shown that even the la rgest industrial undertakings can be organized so as to consist of a 
number of co-ordinated but  self-governing groups; and he has produc ed reasons for supposing that such an 
organization would not reduce the efficiency of the busin esses concerned and might even increase it. This small-
scale industrial democracy is theoretical ly compatible with any kind of la rge-scale control of the industries 
concerned. It can be (and in certain cases actually ha s been) applied to industrie s working under the capitalist 
system; to businesses under direct state control; to co-operative enterprises; to mixed concerns, like the Port of 
London Authority, which are under state s upervision, but have their own aut onomous, functional management. In 
practice this small-scale industrial demo cracy, this self-government for all, is  intrinsically most compatible with 
business organizations of the last two kinds -- co-operative and mixed. It is  almost equally incompatible with 
capitalism and state socialism. Capitalism tends to produce a multiplicity of petty dictat ors, each in command of 
his own little business kingdom. State so cialism tends to produce a single, centr alized, totalitarian dictatorship, 
wielding absolute authority over all its subjects through a hierarchy of bureaucratic agents. 
 Co-operatives and mixed concerns al ready exist and work extremely well. To increase their numbers and to 
extend their scope would not seem a re volutionary act, in the sense that it would probably not provoke the violent 
opposition which men feel toward projects involving an en tirely new principle. In its effects, however, the act

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

139
would be revolutionary; for it would result in a profound modifi cation of the existing system. This alone is a 
sufficient reason for preferring these forms of ultimate industrial control to all others. The intrinsic compatibility of 
the co-operative enterprise and mi xed concern with small-scale demo cracy and self-government all round 
constitutes yet another reason for the pr eference. To discuss the arrangements  for co-ordinating the activities of 
partially autonomous co-opera tive and mixed concerns is not my business in this place. For t echnical details, the 
reader is referred once again to the literature of social and economic planning. I will confine myself here to quoting 
a relevant passage from the admirable essay contributed by Professor David Mitrany to  the Yale Review in 1934. 
Speaking of the need for comprehensive planning, Profe ssor Mitrany writes that "this does not necessarily mean 
more centralized government and bureaucratic administ ration. Public control is just as likely to mean 
decentralization -- as, for instance, the taking over from a nation-wide private corporation of activities and services 
which could be performed with better re sults by local authorities. Planning, in fact, if it is intelligent, should allow 
for a great variety of organization, and should adapt the st ructure and working of its pa rts to the requirements of 
each case." 
 A striking change of view on this point is evident in the paradox that  the growing demand for state action 
comes together with a growing distrust of the state's efficiency. Hence, even among socialists, as may be seen from 
the more recent Fabian tracts, the old idea of the natio nalization of an industry under a government department, 
responsible to Parliament for both policy and manageme nt, has generally been replaced by schemes which even 
under public ownership provide for autonomous functional ma nagements. After describing the constitution of such 
mixed concerns as the Central Electri city Board (set up in England by a Conservative government) the British 
Broadcasting Corporation and the L ondon Transport Board, Professor Mitrany concludes that it is only "by some 
such means that the influence both of politics and of m oney can be eliminated. Radi cals and conservatives now 
agree on the need for placing the mana gement of such public undertakings upon a purely functiona l basis, which 
reduces the role of Parliament or of any other representative body to a distant, occasional and indirect 
determination of general policy." 
 Above these semi-autonomous "functional managers" ther e will have to be, it is clear, an ultimate co-
ordinating authority -- a group of technicians whose business it will be to manage the managers. What is to prevent 
the central political executive from joining hands with th ese technical managers of managers to become the ruling 
oligarchy of a totalitarian state? The answer is that, so  long as nations continue to  prepare for the waging of 
scientific warfare, there is nothing wh atever to prevent this from happeni ng -- there is every reason, indeed, to 
suppose that it will happen. In the context of militarism, ev en the most intrinsically desirable changes inevitably 
become distorted. In a country which is  preparing for modern war, reforms in tended to result in decentralization 
and genuine democracy will be made to serve the purpose of  military efficiency -- wh ich means in practice that 
they will be used to strengthen the position of a dictator or a ruling oligarchy. 
 Where the international context is m ilitaristic, dictators will use the nece ssity for "defense" as their excuse 
for seizing absolute power. But even where there is no threat of war, the temptation to abuse a position of authority 
will always be strong. How shall our hypothetical managers of managers and the members of the central political 
executive be delivered from this evil? Ambition may be  checked, but cannot be suppressed by any kind of legal 
machinery. If it is to be scotched, it must be scotched at the source, by education in the widest sense of the word. In 
our societies men are paranoiacally ambitious, because para noiac ambition is admired as a virtue and successful 
climbers are adored as though they were gods. More books have been written about Napoleon than about any other 
human being. The fact is deeply and al armingly significant. What must be th e day-dreams of people for whom the 
world's most agile social climber and ablest bandit is the hero they most desire to he ar about? Duces and Fuehrers 
will cease to plague the world only when the majority of  its inhabitants regard such adventurers with the same 
disgust as they now bestow on swindlers and pimps. So long as men worship the Caesars and Napoleons, Caesars 
and Napoleons will duly rise and make them miserable. The proper attitude towa rd the "hero" is not Carlyle's, but 
Bacon's. "He doth like the ape," wrote Bacon of the ambitious tyrant, "he dot h like the ape that , the higher he 
clymbes, the more he shewes his ars." The hero's qualitie s are brilliant; but so is the mandril's rump. When all 
concur in the great Lord Ch ancellor's judgment of Fuehrers, there will be no more Fuehrers to judge. Meanwhile 
we must content ourselves by putting me rely legal and administrative obstacles in the way of the ambitious. They 
are a great deal better than nothing; but they can never be completely effective. 
(From Ends and Means)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

140
 
Politics and Religion 
 
 About politics one can make only one completely unque stionable generalization, wh ich is that it is quite 
impossible for statesmen to foresee, for more than a very  short time, the results of any course of large-scale 
political action. Many of them, it is true, justify their actions by pretending to themselves and others that they can 
see a long way ahead; but the fact remains that they can't . If they were completely honest they woul d say, with 
Father Joseph, 
 
 J'ignore où mon dessein, qui surpasse ma vue. 
 Si vite me conduit;  
 Mais comme un astre ardent  qui brille dans la nue, 
 Il me guide en la nuit.  
 
If hell is paved with good intentions, it is, among other reasons, because of the impossibility of calculating 
consequences. Bishop Stubbs therefore condemns those historians who amuse themselves by fixing on individuals 
or groups of men responsibility for the remoter consequences  of their actions. "It strike s me," he writes, "as not 
merely unjust, but as showing an ignorance of the plainest aphorisms of common sense, . . . to make an historical 
character responsible for evils  and crimes, which have resulted from hi s actions by processes which he could not 
foresee." This is sound so far as it goes; but it does not go very far. Besides being a moralist, the historian is one 
who attempts to formulate generalizati ons about human events. It is only by tracing the relations between acts and 
their consequences that such generaliz ations can be made. When they have been made, they are available to 
politicians in framing plans of action. In this way past records of the relation between act s and consequences enter 
the field of ethics as releva nt factors in a situation of  choice. And here it may be pointed out that , though it is 
impossible to foresee the remoter consequences of any given course of action, it is by no means impossible to 
foresee, in the light of past historic al experience, the sort of consequences  that are likely, in a general way, to 
follow certain sorts of acts. Thus, fr om the records of past experience, it seems suffi ciently clear that the 
consequences attendant on a course of action involving such things as large-scal e war, violent revolution, 
unrestrained tyranny and persecution ar e likely to be bad. Consequently, any politician who embarks on such 
courses of action cannot plead ignorance as an excuse. Father Joseph, for example, had read enough history to 
know that policies like that which Richelieu and he were  pursuing are seldom, even when nominally successful, 
productive of lasting good to the parties by whom they were framed. But his passionate ambition for the Bourbons 
made him cling to a voluntary ignorance, which he proceeded to justify by speculations about the will of God.  
 Here it seems worth while to comment briefly on th e curious time sense of t hose who think in political 
terms. Courses of action are recommended on the ground that if carried  out, they cannot fail to result in a solution 
to all outstanding problems -- a solution either definitive and everlasting, like that which Marx foresaw as the result 
of the setting up of a classless society, or else of very long duration, like the thousand-year futures foretold for their 
regimes by Mussolini and Hitler. Richelieu's admirers envisaged a Bourbon golden age longer than the 
hypothetical Nazi or Fascist era, but shorter (since it had a limit) than the final, classless stage of Communism. In a 
contemporary defense of the Cardinal's policy against the Huguenots, Voiture justif ies the great expenditures 
involved by saying that "the capture of La Rochelle alone has economized millions; for La Rochelle would have 
raised rebellion at every royal minorit y, every revolt of the nobles during th e next two thousand years." Such are 
the illusions cherished by the politically minded when th ey reflect on the consequences of a policy immediately 
before or immediately after it has been put in action. But when the policy has begun to show its fruits, their time 
sense undergoes a radical change. Gone ar e the calculations in te rms of centuries or mille nnia. A single victory is 
now held to justify a Te Deum, and if the policy yields apparently suc cessful results for only a few years, the 
statesman feels satisfied and hi s sycophants are lavish in th eir praise of his genius. Even sober historians writing 
long after the event tend to express themselves in the same  vein. Thus, Richelieu is pr aised by modern writers as a 
very great and far-sighted statesma n, even though it is  perfectly clear that the actions he undertook for the 
aggrandizement of the Bourbon dynasty cr eated the social and economic and pol itical conditions which led to the 
downfall of that dynasty, the rise of Prussia and the cat astrophes of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. His 
policy is praised as if it had been eminently successful , and those who objected to it are blamed for their short-

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

141
sighted views. Here, for example, is what Gustave Fagni ez has to say of the French  peasants and burgesses who 
opposed the Cardinal's war policy -- a policy for which they had to pay with their money, their privations and their 
blood. "Always selfish and unintelligent, the masses cannot be expected to put up for a long time with hardships, of 
which future generations are destined to reap the fruits ." And this immediately after a passage setting forth the 
nature of these particular fruits -- the union of all Eur ope against Louis XIV and the ruin of the French people. 
Such extraordinary inconsistency can only be explained by th e fact that, when people come to talk of their nation's 
successes, they think in terms of the very briefest peri ods of time. A triumph is to  be hymned and gloated over, 
even if it lasts no more than a day. Retrospectively, men like Richelieu and Louis XIV and Napoleon are more 
admired for the brief glory they achieved than hated for the long-drawn miseries which were the price of that glory. 
 Among the sixteen hundred-odd ladies whose names we re set down in the catalogue of Don Giovanni's 
conquests, there were doubtless not a few whose favors made it necessary for the hero to consult his physician. But 
pox or no pox, the mere fact that the favors had been given was a thing to feel proud of, a victory worth recording 
in Leporello's chronicle of successes. The history of the nations is written in the same spirit. 
 So much for the consequences of the policy which Fa ther Joseph helped to frame and execute. Now for the 
questions of ethics. Ethically, Father Joseph's position was not the same as that of an ordinary politician. It was not 
the same because, unlike ordinary politicians, he was an as pirant to sanctity, a contemplative with a considerable 
working knowledge of mysticism, one who knew the nature of spiritual religion and had actually made some 
advance along the "way of pe rfection" toward union with God. Theologians agree that all Chris tians are called to 
union with God, but that few are willing to make the choice which qualifies them  to be chosen. Father Joseph was 
one of those few. But having made the c hoice, he went on, some year s later, to make another; he chose to go into 
politics, as Richelieu's collaborator. As we have seen, Father Joseph's intenti on was to combine the life of political 
activity with that of contemplation, to do what power po litics demanded and to annihilate it in God's will even 
while it was being done. In practice, the things which had to be done proved unannihilatabl e, and with one part of 
his being Father Joseph came to be bitter ly sorry that he had ever entered polit ics. But there was also another part 
of him, a part that craved for action, that yearned to do something heroic for the gr eater glory of  God. Looking 
back over his life, Father Jo seph, the contemplative, felt that he had don e wrong, or at any rate  been very unwise, 
to enter politics. But if he had not done  so, if he had remained the evangelist, teacher and religious reformer, he 
would probably have felt to the end of  his days that he had done wrong to  neglect the opportunity of doing God's 
will in the great world of international politics -- gesta Dei per Francos. 
 Father Joseph's dilemma is one which confronts all sp irituals and contemplatives, all who aspire to worship 
God theocentrically and for his own sake, all who attempt to obey the commandment to be perfect as their Father 
in heaven is perfect. In orde r to think clearly about  this dilemma, we must learn firs t of all to think clearly about 
certain matters of more general import. Catholic theologians had done a great de al of this necessary clear thinking, 
and, if he had cared to make use of them, Father Joseph could have found in the teachings of his predecessors and 
contemporaries most of the materials for a sound philos ophy of action and a sound so ciology of contemplation. 
That he did not make use of them was due to the peculiar  nature of his temperament and talents and, above all, to 
his intense vicarious ambition for the French monarchy. He was lured away from the path of perfection by the most 
refined of all temptations -- the baits of loyalty and self-sac rifice, but of a loyalty to a cause inferior to the supreme 
good, a sacrifice of self undertaken in the name of something less than God. 
 Let us begin by a consideration of  the theory of action which was current in the speculative writings 
available to Father Joseph. The first thing we have to remember is that, when theologians speak of the active life as 
contrasted with that of contemplati on, they do not refer to what contempor ary, non-theological writers call by the 
same name. To us, "life of action" means the sort of life led by movie heroes , business executives, war 
correspondents, cabinet ministers and the like. To the theologians, all these are merely worldly lives, lived more or 
less unregenerately by people who ha ve done little or nothing to ge t rid of their Old Adams. What they call active 
life, is the life of good works. To be active is to follow the way of Martha, who spent her time ministering to the 
material needs of the master, while Mary (who in all myst ical literature stands for the contemplative) sat and 
listened to his words: When Father Joseph chose the life of politics, he knew very well that it was not the life of 
action in the theological sense, that the way of Richelieu was not identical with the way of Martha. True, France 
was, ex hypothesi and almost by definition, the instrument of divi ne providence. Therefore any policy tending to 
the aggrandizement of France must be  good in its essence. But though its essence might be good and entirely

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

142
accordant with God's will, its accidents were often questi onable. This was where the practice of active annihilation 
came in. By means of it, Father Joseph hoped to be able to sterilize the rather dirty things he did and to make them 
harmless, at any rate to himself. 
 Most people at the present time probably take for gr anted the validity of the pragmatists' contention, that 
the end of thought is action. In the philosophy which Father  Joseph had studied and made his own, this position is 
reversed. Here contemplation is the e nd and action (in which is included discur sive thought) is valuable only as a 
means to the beatific vision of God. In the words of St. Thomas Aquinas, "action should be something added to the 
life of prayer, not something taken away from it." To the man of the world, this statement is almost totally devoid 
of meaning. To the contemplative, whos e concern is with spiritual religion, with the kingdom of God rather than 
the kingdom of selves, it seems axiomatic. Starting from th is fundamental principle of  theocentric religion, the 
practical mystics have critically examined the whole idea of action and have laid down, in regard to it, a set of rules 
for the guidance of those desiring to follow the mystic al path toward the beatific vision. One of the best 
formulations of the traditional mystical doctrine in re gard to action was made by Father Joseph's contemporary, 
Louis Lallemant. Lallemant was a Jesuit, who, in spite of the prevailing anti-mystical tendencies of his order, was 
permitted to teach a very advanced (but entirely orthodox) kind of spirituality to the men entrusted to his care. 
 Whenever we undertake any action, Father Lallemant insists, we must model ourselves upon God himself, 
who creates and sustains the world wit hout in any way modifying his essentia l existence. But we cannot do this 
unless we learn to practice formal contemplation and a co nstant awareness of God's presence. Both are difficult, 
especially the latter which is  possible only to those very  far advanced along the way of perfection. So far as 
beginners are concerned, even the doi ng of good works may distract  the soul from God. Action is not safe, except 
for proficients in the art of mental prayer. "If we have gone far in orison, " says Lallemant, "we shall give much to 
action; if we are but middlingly advanced in the inward life, we shall give ourselves  only moderately to outward 
life; if we have only a very little inwardness, we shall give nothing at all to what is external, unless our vow of 
obedience commands the contrary." To the reasons already given for this injunction we may add others of a strictly 
utilitarian nature. It is a matter of experience and obs ervation that actions undertak en by ordinary unregenerate 
people, sunk in their selfhood and wit hout spiritual insight, seldom do much good. A generation before Lallemant, 
St. John of the Cross had put the whole matter in a single question and answer. Those who rush headlong into good 
works without having acquired throu gh contemplation the power to act well -- what do they accomplish? "Poco 
mas que nada, y a veces nada, y aun a veces dano." (Little more than nothing, and sometimes nothing at all, and 
sometimes even harm.) One reason for hell being paved wi th good intentions has alrea dy been mentioned, and to 
this, the impossibility of foreseeing the consequences of actions, we must  now add another, the intrinsically 
unsatisfactory nature of actions performed by the ordi nary run of average unregen erate men and women. This 
being so, Lallemant recommends the least possible extern al activity until such time as , by contemplation and the 
unremitting practice of the presence, the soul has been trained to give itself completely to God. Those who have 
traveled only a little way along the road to union, "shoul d not go out of themselves for the service of their 
neighbors, except by way of trial and e xperiment. We must be like those hunti ng dogs that are still half held upon 
the leash. When we shall have come by contemplation to pos sess God, we shall be able to  give greater freedom to 
our zeal." External activity causes no interruption in the or ison of the proficie nt; on the contrary it is a means for 
bringing them nearer to reality. Those for whom it is not such a means should as far as possible refrain from action. 
Once again Father Lallemant justifies himself by the appeal  to experience and a purely utilitarian consideration of 
consequences. In all that concerns the saving of souls and the improving of  the quality of people's thoughts and 
feelings and behavior, "a man of orison will accomplish more in one year than another man in all his life." 
 What is true of good works is true, a fortiori, of merely worldly activity, particularly when it is activity on a 
large scale, involving the collaboration of great numbers of individuals in ev ery stage of unenlightenment. Good is 
a product of the ethical and spiritual ar tistry of individuals; it cannot be mass-produced. All Catholic theologians 
were well aware of this truth, and the church has acted upo n it since its earliest days. The monastic orders -- and 
preeminently that to which Father Joseph himself belonged -- were living demonstrations of the traditional doctrine 
of action. This doctrine affirmed that  goodness of more than average quant ity and quality could be practically 
realized only on a small scale, by self-dedicated and speci ally trained individuals. In  his own work of religious 
reform and spiritual instruction, Father  Joseph always acted on this same prin ciple. The art of mental prayer was 
taught by him only to individuals or sma ll groups; the Calvarian rule was given as a way of  life to only a very few

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

143
of the nuns of Fontevrault, the order as a whole being mu ch too large to be capable of realizing that peculiar 
spiritual good which the reform was intended to produce. And yet, in spite of his th eoretical and experimental 
knowledge that good cannot be mass-produced in an unregener ate society, Father Joseph went into power politics, 
convinced not only that by so doing he wa s fulfilling the will of God, but also that great and lasting material and 
spiritual benefits would result from the war which he di d his best to prolong and exac erbate. He knew that it was 
useless to try to compel the good ladies of Fontevrault to be more virtuous and spiritual than they wanted to be; and 
yet he believed that active French intervention in the Thir ty Years' War would result in "a new golden age." This 
strange inconsistency was, as we have often insisted, mainly  a product of the will -- that  will which Father Joseph 
thought he had succeeded in subordinating to the will of G od, but which remained, in certain important respects, 
unregenerately that of the natural man. In  part, however, it was also due to inte llectual causes, specifically to his 
acceptance of a certain theory of providen ce, widely held in the church and itsel f inconsistent with the theories of 
action and the good outlined above. According to this theo ry, all history is providential and its interminable 
catalogue of crimes and insanities is an expression of the divine will. As the most spectacular crimes and insanities 
of history are perpetrated at the orders of governments, it follows that these and the states they rule are also 
embodiments of God's will. Granted the truth of this provide ntial theory of history and the state, Father Joseph was 
justified in believing that the Thirty Years' War was a good thing and that a policy which disseminated 
cannibalism, and universalized the practice of torture a nd murder, might be wholly accordant with God's will, 
provided only that it was advantageous to France. This condition was essential; for as a politician, one was justified 
by the providential theory of history in believing that God performs his gesta per Francos, even though, as a 
practical reformer and spiritual direct or one knew very well that the deeds of God get done, not by the Franks at 
large, but by one Frank here and another there, even by occasional Britons, such as Benet Fitch, and occasional 
Spaniards, such as St. Teresa. 
 Mystical philosophy can be summed up in a single phrase:  "The more of the creature, the less of God." The 
large-scale activities of unregenerate me n and women are almost wholly creatur ely; therefore they almost wholly 
exclude God. If history is an expression of the divine w ill, it is so mainly in a negative sense. The crimes and 
insanities of large-scale human societies are related to God's will only in so far as they are acts of disobedience to 
that will, and it is only in this sens e that they and the miseries resulting from them can properly be regarded as 
providential. Father Joseph justified the campaigns he plan ned by an appeal to the God of Battles. But there is no 
God of Battles; there is only an ultimate reality, expressi ng itself in a certain nature of things, whose harmony is 
violated by such events as battles, with consequences more or less disastrous for all directly or indirectly concerned 
in the violation. 
 This brings us to the heart of that great paradox of po litics -- the fact that political action is necessary and at 
the same time incapable of satisfying the needs which called it into existence. 
 Only static and isolated societies, whose way of life is determined by an unquestioned tradition, can 
dispense with politics. In unstable, unisolated, technologically progressive societies, such as ours, large-scale 
political action is unavoidable. But even when it is well-i ntentioned (which it very often is not) political action is 
always foredoomed to a partial, sometimes even a complete , self-stultification. The intr insic nature of the human 
instruments with which, and the human materials upon whic h, political action must be carried out, is a positive 
guarantee against the possibility that such action shall yield the results that were expected from it. This 
generalization could be illustrated by an indefinite number of instances drawn from history. Consider, for example, 
the results actually achieved by two reforms upon which well-intentioned people have placed the most enormous 
hopes -- universal education a nd public ownership of the m eans of production. Universal education has proved to 
be the state's most effective instrument of universal regimentation and militarization, and has exposed millions, 
hitherto immune, to the influence of  organized lying and the allurements of incessant, imb ecile and debasing 
distractions. Public ownership of the means of production has been put into e ffect on a large scale only in Russia, 
where the results of the reform have  been, not the elimination of oppressi on, but the replacement of one kind of 
oppression by another -- of money power  by political and bureaucratic power , of the tyranny of rich men by a 
tyranny of the police and the party. 
 For several thousands of years now  men have been experimenting with different methods for improving the 
quality of human instruments and human  material. It has been found that a good deal can be done by such strictly 
humanistic methods as the improvement  of the social and economic environm ent, and the various techniques of

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

144
character training. Among men and wome n of a certain type, startling resu lts can be obtained by means of 
conversion and catharsis. But though th ese methods are somewhat more e ffective than thos e of the purely 
humanistic variety, they work only erratically and they do not produce the radical and permanent transformation of 
personality, which must take place, a nd take place on a very large scale, if political action is ever to produce the 
beneficial results expected from it. For the radical and permanent transforma tion of personality only one effective 
method has been discovered -- that of  the mystics. It is a difficult met hod, demanding from those who undertake it 
a great deal more patience, resolution, self-abnegation and awareness than most people are prepared to give, except 
perhaps in times of crisis, when they are ready for a short while to make the most enormous sacrifices. But 
unfortunately the amelioration of the world cannot be achieved by sacrifices in moments of crisis; it depends on the 
efforts made and constantly repeated during the humdru m, uninspiring periods, which separate one crisis from 
another, and of which normal lives mainly consist. Because  of the general reluctance to make such efforts during 
uncritical times, very few people are pr epared, at any given moment of hi story, to undertake the method of the 
mystics. This being so, we shall be foolish if we expect any political action, however well-intentioned and however 
nicely planned, to produce more than a fraction of the general betterment anticipated. 
 The history of any nation follows an undulatory cour se. In the trough of the wave we find more or less 
complete anarchy; but the crest is not more or less comple te Utopia, but only, at best, a tolerably humane, partially 
free and fairly just society that invariably carries w ithin itself the seeds of its own decadence. Large-scale 
organizations are capable, it would seem, of going down a good deal further than they can go up. We may 
reasonably expect to reach the upper li mit once again; but unless a great many more people than in the past are 
ready to undertake the only method capable of transfor ming personality, we may not e xpect to rise appreciably 
above it. 
 What can the politicians do for their fellows by actions within the political field, and without the assistance 
of the contemplatives? The an swer would seem to be: not very much. Political reforms cannot be expected to 
produce much general betterment, unless large numbers of individuals undertake the transformation of their 
personality by the only known method which really works -- that of the contemplatives. Moreover, should the 
amount of mystical, theocentric leaven in the lump of humanity suffer a significant decrease, politicians may find it 
impossible to raise the societies they rule even to the very moderate heights realized in the past. 
 Meanwhile, politicians can do something to create a so cial environment favorable to contemplatives. Or 
perhaps it is better to put the matter negatively and say that  they can refrain from doing certain things and making 
certain arrangements which are specially unfavorable. 
 The political activity that seems to be least compatib le with theocentric religion is that which aims at 
increasing a certain special type of social efficiency -- th e efficiency required for waging or threatening large-scale 
war. To achieve this kind of efficiency, politicians always  aim at some kind of totalitarianism. Acting like the man 
of science who can only deal with the complex problems of real life by arbitrarily simplifying them for 
experimental purposes, the politician in search of military efficiency arbitrarily simplifies the society with which he 
has to deal. But whereas the scientist simplifies by a pr ocess of analysis and isol ation, the politician can only 
simplify by compulsion, by a Procrustean process of chopping and stretching designed to make the living organism 
conform to a certain easily understood and readily manipulated mechanical pattern. Planning a new kind of 
national, military efficiency, Richelieu set himself to simp lify the complexity of French society. That complexity 
was largely chaotic, and a policy of simplification, judi ciously carried out by desirable means would have been 
fully justified. But Richelieu's policy was not judicious and, when continued after his death, resulted in the 
totalitarianism of Louis XIV -- a totalitarianism which was intended to be as complete as anything we see in the 
modern world, and which only failed to be so by reason of the wret ched systems of communication and 
organization available to the Grand Monarque's secret police. The tyrannical spirit was very willing, but, 
fortunately for the French, the techno logical flesh was weak. In an era of  telephones, finger printing, tanks and 
machine guns, the task of a totalitarian government is easier than it was. 
 Totalitarian politicians demand obedience and conform ity in every sphere of life, including, of course, the 
religious. Here, their aim is to use religion as an instrume nt of social consolidation, an  increaser of the country's 
military efficiency. For this reason, the only kind of religio n they favor is strictly anthropocentric, exclusive and 
nationalistic. Theocentric religion, involvi ng the worship of God for his own sake, is inadmissible in a totalitarian 
state. All the contemporary dictators, Russian, Turkish, It alian and German, have either discouraged or actively

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

145
persecuted any religious organization whose members advocate the worship of G od, rather than the worship of the 
deified state or the local pol itical boss. Louis XIV was what is called "a good Catholic"; but his attitude toward 
religion was characteristically totalitarian. He wanted religious unity, therefore he revoked the Edict of Nantes and 
persecuted the Huguenots. He wanted an exclusive, nationali stic religion; therefore he quarreled with the Pope and 
insisted on his own spiritual supremacy in France. He want ed state-worship and king-worship; therefore he sternly 
discouraged those who taught theocentric religion, who advocated the worship of God alone and for his own sake. 
The decline of mysticism at the end of the seventeenth  century was due in part to the fatal over-orthodoxy of 
Bérulle and his school, but partly also to a deliberate pe rsecution of mystics at the hands of ecclesiastics, who 
could say, with Bossuet, that they worshiped God under the forms of the Ki ng, Jesus Christ and the Church. The 
attack on quietism was only partly the thing it professed to be -- a punitive expedition against certain rather silly 
heretical views and certain rather undesirable practices. It was also and more significantly a veiled assault upon 
mysticism itself. The controversial writings of Nicole, wh o worked in close collabor ation with Bossuet, make it 
quite clear that the real en emy was spiritual religion as such. Unfortuna tely for Nicole, the church had given its 
approval to the doctrines and practices of earlier mystics, and it was therefore necessary to  proceed with caution; 
but this caution was not incompatible with a good deal of  anti-mystical violence. C onsciously, or unconsciously, 
Nicole and the other enemies of contemplation and theocentric religion were playing the game of totalitarianism. 
 The efficiency of a pre-industrial totalitarian state, such as that which Richelieu planned and Louis XIV 
actually realized, can never be so high as that of an industrial state, possessed of modern weapons, communications 
and organizing methods. Conversely, it does not need to be so high. A national industrial system is something so 
complicated that, if it is to function pr operly and compete with other national sy stems, it must be controlled in all 
its details by a centralized state authorit y. Even if the intentions of the various centralized state authorities were 
pacific, which they are not, industrialism would tend of its  very nature to transfor m them into totalitarian 
governments. When the need for military  efficiency is added to the need for industrial efficiency, totalitarianism 
becomes inevitable. Technological progress, nationalism and war seem to guarantee that the immediate future of 
the world shall belong to various forms of  totalitarianism. But a world made sa fe for totalitarianism is a world, in 
all probability, made very unsafe for mysticism and theo centric religion. And a worl d made unsafe for mysticism 
and theocentric religion is a world where the only proved method of transforming personality will be less and less 
practiced, and where fewer and fewer peop le will possess any direct , experimental knowledge of reality to set up 
against the false doctrine of totalitarian anthropocentris m and the pernicious ideas a nd practices of nationalistic 
pseudo-mysticism. In such a world there seems little prosp ect that any political reform, however well intentioned, 
will produce the results expected of it. 
 The quality of moral behavior varies in inverse ra tio to the number of human beings involved. Individuals 
and small groups do not always and automatically behave well. But at least they can be moral and rational to a 
degree unattainable by large groups. For,  as numbers increase, personal relations between members of the group, 
and between its members and those of other groups, become more difficult and finally, for the vast majority of the 
individuals concerned, impossible. Imagination has to take the place of direct acquaintance, behavior motivated by 
a reasoned and impersonal benevolence,  the place of behavior motivated by personal affection and a spontaneous 
and unreflecting compassion. But in most men and women reason, sympathe tic imagination and the impersonal 
view of things are very slightly developed. That is why, among other reasons, the et hical standards prevailing 
within large groups, between large gr oups, and between the rulers and the ruled in a large group, are generally 
lower than those prevailing within and among small groups. The art of what may be cal led "goodness politics," as 
opposed to power politics, is the art of organizing on a large scale without sacrificing the ethi cal values which 
emerge only among individuals and small groups. More specifi cally, it is the art of combining decentralization of 
government and industry, local and functional autonomy and smallness of administrative units with enough over-
all efficiency to guarantee the smooth running of the federated whole. Goodness politics have never been attempted 
in any large society, and it may be doubt ed whether such an attempt, if made , could achieve more than a partial 
success, so long as the majority of individuals c oncerned remain unable or unwilling to transform their 
personalities by the only method known to be effective.  But though the attempt to substitute goodness politics for 
power politics may never be complete ly successful, it still remains true  that the methods of goodness politics 
combined with individual training in theocentric th eory and contemplative prac tice alone provide the means 
whereby human societies can become a lit tle less unsatisfactory than they have  been up to the pr esent. So long as

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

146
they are not adopted, we must expect to see an indefinite  continuance of the dismally familiar alternations between 
extreme evil and a very imperfect, self -stultifying good, alternations which cons titute the history of all civilized 
societies. In a world inhabited by wh at the theologians call unregenerate, or natural men, church and state can 
probably never become appreciably better than the best of the states and churches, of which the past has left us the 
record. Society can never be greatly improved, until su ch time as most of its members choose to become 
theocentric saints. Meanwhile, the few theocentric saints which exist at any given moment are able in some slight 
measure to qualify and mitigate the poisons which societ y generates within itself by its political and economic 
activities. In the gospel phrase, theocentric saints are the salt which preserves the social world from breaking down 
into irremediable decay. 
 This antiseptic and antidotal function of the theocentric is performed in a variety of ways. First of all, the 
mere fact that he exists is prof oundly salutary and important. The potentia lity of knowledge of, and union with, 
God is present in all men and women. In most of them, however, it is covered, as Eckhart puts it, "by thirty or forty 
skins or hides, like an ox's or a bear's, so thick and hard."  But beneath all this leather, and in spite of its toughness, 
the divine more-than-self, which is the quick and principle of our being, remains alive, and can and does respond to 
the shining manifestation of the same principle in the theo centric saint. The "old man dressed all in leather" meets 
the new man, who has succeeded in stripping off the carapace of his thirty or forty ox-hides, and walks through the 
world, a naked soul, no longer opaque to the radiance immane nt within him. From this meeting, the old man is 
likely to come away profoundly impressed by the strangeness of what he has seen, and with the nostalgic sense that 
the world would be a better place if ther e were less leather in it. Again and again in the course of history, the 
meeting with a naked and translucent spir it, even the reading about such spirits,  has sufficed to restrain the leather 
men who rule over their fellows from using their power to ex cess. It is respect for theocentric saints that prompts 
the curious hypocrisy which accompanies and seeks to veil the brutal facts of political action. The preambles of 
treaties are always drawn up in the choices t Pecksniffian style, and the more sinister the designs of a politician, the 
more high-flown, as a rule, becomes the nobility of his language. Ca nt is always rather na useating; but before we 
condemn political hypocrisy, let us remember  that it is the tribute paid by me n of leather to men of God, and that 
the acting of the part of someone bette r than oneself may actually commit one to a course of behavior perceptibly 
less evil than what would be normal and natural in an avowed cynic. 
 The theocentric saint is impressive, not only for what he  is, but also for what he  does and says. His actions 
and all his dealings with the world are marked by disinter estedness and serenity, invariable truthfulness and a total 
absence of fear. These qualities are the fruits of the doc trine he preaches, and their manifestation in his life 
enormously reinforces that doctrine and gives him a certain strange kind of uncoercive but none the less 
compelling authority over his fellow men. The essence of this authority is that it is purely spiritual and moral, and 
is associated with none of the ordinary social sanctions of power, position or wealth. It  was here, of course, that 
Father Joseph made his gravest and most fatal mistake. Even if his mysticism had proved to be compatible with his 
power politics, which it did not, he would still have been wrong to accept  the position of Rich elieu's collaborator; 
for by accepting it he automatically deprived himself of the power to exercise a truly spiritual authority, he cut 
himself off from the very possibility of being the apostle of mysticism. 
 True, he could still be of use to his Calvarian nuns, as a teacher of c ontemplation; but this was because he 
entered their convent, not as the forei gn minister of France, but as a simple  director. Outside the convent, he was 
always the Grey Eminence. People coul d not speak to him without remember ing that he was a man from whom 
there was much to hope or fear; between themselves and this friar turned politician, there could no longer be the 
direct contact of soul with naked soul. For them, his authority was temporal, not spiritual. Moreover, they 
remembered that this was the man who had organized the se cret service, who gave inst ructions to spies, who had 
outwitted the Emperor at Ratisbon, who had worked his hardest to prolong the war; and remembering these things, 
they could be excused for having their doubts about Fath er Joseph's brand of religion. The tree is known by its 
fruits, and if these were the fruits of mental prayer and the unitiv e life -- why, then they saw no reason why they 
shouldn't stick to wine and women, tempered by church on Sundays, confession once a quarter and communion at 
Christmas and Easter. 
 It is a fatal thing, say the Indians, for the members of  one caste to usurp the functions that properly belong 
to another. Thus when the mercha nts trespass upon the ground of the kshatriyas and undertake the business of 
ruling, society is afflicted by all the evils of capitalism; and when the kshatriyas do what only the theocentric

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

147
brahmin has a right to do, when they presume to lay down the law on spiritual matters, there is totalitarianism, with 
its idolatrous religions, its de ifications of the nati on, the party, the local political bo ss. Effects no less disastrous 
occur when the brahmins go into politics or business; for then they lose their spiritual insight and authority, and the 
society which it was their business to enlighten remains wh olly dark, deprived of all communication with divine 
reality, and consequently an easy victim to preachers of false doctrines. Father Joseph is an eminent example of 
this last confusion of the castes. Abandoning seership for rulership, he gradually, despite his most strenuous efforts 
to retain it, lost the mystical vision which had given him his spiritual author ity -- but not, unfortunately, before he 
had covered with that authority many acts and policies of the most questionable na ture. (Richelieu was a good 
psychologist, and it will be remembered that "whenever he  wanted to perform some pi ece of knavery, he always 
made use of men of piety.") In a very  little while, the last vestiges of  Father Joseph's spiritual authority 
disappeared, and he came, as we have seen, to be regard ed with general horror, as a man capable of every crime 
and treachery. 
 The politically minded Jesuits, w ho practiced the same disastrous c onfusion of castes, came to have a 
reputation as bad as Father Joseph's.  The public was wrong in thinking of these generally virtuous and well-
intentioned men as fairy-tale monsters ; but in condemning the fundamental principle of their work in the world, it 
was profoundly right. The business of a s eer is to see, and if he involves himself in the kind of God-eclipsing 
activities which make seeing impossible, he betrays the trus t which his fellows have tacitly placed in him. Mystics 
and theocentrics are not always loved or invariably listened  to; far from it. Prejudice and the dislike of what is 
unusual, may blind their contemporaries to the virtues of these men and wome n of the margin, may cause them to 
be persecuted as enemies of society. But should they le ave their margin, should they take to competing for place 
and power within the main body of society, they are certain to be generally hate d and despised as traitors to their 
seership. 
 To be a seer is not the same thing as to be a mere  spectator. Once the contemplative has fitted himself to 
become, in Lallemant's phrase, "a man of much orison," he  can undertake work in the world with no risk of being 
thereby distracted from his vision of reality, and with fair hope of achievi ng an appreciable amount of good. As a 
matter of historical fact, many of th e great theocentrics have been men a nd women of enormous and beneficent 
activity. 
 The work of the theocentrics is always marginal, is always started on the smallest scale and, when it 
expands, the resulting organization is always subdivided into  units sufficiently small to be capable of a shared 
spiritual experience and of moral and rational conduct. 
 The first aim of the theocentrics is to make it po ssible for any one who desires it to share their own 
experience of ultimate reality. The groups  they create are organized primarily  for the worship of God for God's 
sake. They exist in order to disseminate various methods (not all of equal value) fo r transforming the "natural 
man," and for learning to know the more -than-personal reality immanent within the leathery casing of selfhood. At 
this point, many theocentrics are content to stop. They have their experience of  reality and they proceed to impart 
the secret to a few immediate disciples, or commit it to writing in a book that will be read by a wider circle 
removed from them by great stretche s of space and time. Or else, more systematically, they establish small 
organized groups, a self-perpetuating order of contemplatives living under a rule. In so far as they may be expected 
to maintain or possibly increase th e number of seers and theocentrics in  a given community, these proceedings 
have a considerable social importance. Many theocentrics, however, are not content with this, but go on to employ 
their organizations to make a direct attack upon the thor niest social problems. Such attacks are always launched 
from the margin, not the center, always (at any rate in th eir earlier phases) with the sanction of a purely spiritual 
authority, not with the coercive power of the state. Some times the attack is directed against economic evils, as 
when the Benedictines addressed themselves to the revi val of agriculture and the dr aining of swamps. Sometimes, 
the evils are those of ignoran ce and the attack is through various kinds of  education. Here again the Benedictines 
were pioneers. (It is worth remarking that the Benedictin e order owed its existence to the apparent folly of a young 
man who, instead of doing the proper, sensible thing, wh ich was to go through the Roman schools and become an 
administrator under the Gothic emperors, went away and, for three years, lived  alone in a hole in the mountains. 
When he had become "a man of much orison," he emer ged, founded monasteries and co mposed a rule to fit the 
needs to a self-perpetuating order of hard-working contemplatives. In the su cceeding centuries, the order civilized 
northwestern Europe, introduced or re-established the be st agricultural practice of  the time, provided the only

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

148
educational facilities then available, and preserved a nd disseminated the treasures of ancient literature. For 
generations Benedictinism was the princi pal antidote to barbarism. Europe owes  an incalculable debt to the young 
man who, because he was more interested in knowing God than in getting on, or even "doing good," in the world, 
left Rome for that burrow in the hillside above Subiaco.) 
 Work in the educational field has been undertaken  by many theocentric organizations other than the 
Benedictine order -- all too often, unha ppily, under the restrictive influence of the political, state-supported and 
state-supporting church. More recently the state has ever ywhere assumed the role of universal educator -- a 
position that exposes governments to peculiar temptations, to  which sooner or later they all succumb, as we see at 
the present time, when the school system  is used in almost every country as an instrument of regimentation, 
militarization and nationalistic propaganda. In any state th at pursued goodness politics ra ther than power politics, 
education would remain a public charge, paid for out of the taxes, but would be returned, subject to the fulfillment 
of certain conditions, to private hands.  Under such an arrangement, most sc hools would probably be  little or no 
better than they are at present; but  at least their badness would be vari egated, while educators of exceptional 
originality or possessed of the gift of seership would be given opportunities for teaching at present denied them. 
 Philanthropy is a field in which ma ny men and women of the margin have labored to the great advantage of 
their fellows. We may mention the truly astounding work accomplished by Father Joseph's contemporary, St. 
Vincent de Paul, a great theocentric, and a great benefactor to the people of seventeenth-century France. Small and 
insignificant in its beginnings , and carried on, as it expanded, under sp iritual authority alone and upon the margin 
of society, Vincent's work among the poor did something to mitigate the sufferings imposed by the war and by the 
ruinous fiscal policy which the war made necessary. Having at their disposal all the powers and resources of the 
state, Richelieu and Father Joseph were able, of course, to  do much more harm than St . Vincent and his little band 
of theocentrics could do good. The antidote was sufficient to offset only a part of the poison. 
 It was the same with another great seventeenth-century  figure, George Fox. Born at the very moment when 
Richelieu was made president of the council and Father Jo seph finally committed himself to the political life, Fox 
began his ministry the year before the Peace of Westphalia was signed. In the course of the next twenty years the 
Society of Friends gradually crystallized into its definitive form. Fana tically marginal -- for when invited, he 
refused even to dine at Cromwell's table, for fear of being compromised -- Fox was never corrupted by success, but 
remained to the end the apostle of the inner light. Th e society he founded has had its ups and downs, its long 
seasons of spiritual torpor and stagnation, as well as its times of spiritual life; but always the Quakers have clung to 
Fox's intransigent theocentrism and, along with it, to his conviction that, if it is to remain at all pure and unmixed, 
good must be worked for upon the margin of society, by individuals and by organiza tions small enough to be 
capable of moral, rational and spiritual life. That is why, in the two hundred and seventy-five years of its existence, 
the Society of Friends has been able to accomplish a sum of useful and beneficent work  entirely out of proportion 
to its numbers. Here again the antidote has always been insufficient to offset more than a part of the poison injected 
into the body politic by the statesmen, financiers, industr ialists, ecclesiastics and a ll the undistinguished millions 
who fill the lower ranks of the social hierarchy. But though not enough to counteract more than some of the effects 
of the poison, the leaven of theocentrism is the one thing which, hitherto, has saved the civilized world from total 
self-destruction. Father Joseph's hope of leading a whole national community along a political short cut into the 
kingdom of heaven on earth is illusory, so long as  the human instruments and materi al of political  action remain 
untransformed. His place was with the antidote-makers, not with those who brew the poisons. 
(From Grey Eminence) 
 
 
 
The Scientist's Role 
 
 It is fashionable nowadays to sa y that Malthus was wrong, because he did not foresee that improved 
methods of transportation can now guarantee that food surpluses produced in one area shall be quickly and cheaply 
transferred to another, where there is a shortage. But first of all, modern tran sportation methods break down 
whenever the power politician s resort to modern war, and even when the fighting stops they are apt to remain 
disrupted long enough to guarantee the starvation of m illions of persons. And, se condly, no country in which

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

149
population has outstripped the local food supply can, under present conditions, establish a claim on the surpluses of 
other countries without paying for them in cash or exports. Great Britain and the other countries in western Europe, 
which cannot feed their dense populations , have been able, in times of peace,  to pay for the food they imported by 
means of the export of manufactured goods. But industria lly backward India and Ch ina -- countries in which 
Malthus' nightmare has come true with a vengeance and on the largest scale -- produ ce few manufactured goods, 
consequently lack the means to buy from underpopulated ar eas the food they need. But when and if they develop 
mass-producing industries to the point at which they are able to export enough to pay for the food their rapidly 
expanding populations require, what will be the effect upon  world trade and international politics? Japan had to 
export manufactured goods in order to pay for the f ood that could not be produced on the overcrowded home 
islands. Goods produced by workers with a low standard of living came into competition with goods produced by 
the better paid workers of the West, and undersold them. The West's retort was political and consisted of the 
imposition of high tariffs, quotas and embargoes. To these re strictions on her trade Japan's answer was the plan for 
creating a vast Asiatic empire at the expense of China and of the Western im perialist powers. The result was war. 
What will happen when India and China are as highly industr ialized as prewar Japan and seek to exchange their 
low-priced manufactured goods for food, in competition with Western powers, w hose standard of living is a great 
deal higher than theirs? Nobody can fo retell the future; but undoubtedly the ra pid industrialization of Asia (with 
equipment, let it be remembered, of th e very latest and best pos twar design) is pregnant with the most dangerous 
possibilities. 
 It is at this point that internationally organized sc ientists and technicians might  contribute greatly to the 
cause of peace by planning a world-wide campaign, not merely for greater food production, but also (and this is the 
really important point) for regional self-sufficiency in food production. Greater food production can be obtained 
relatively easily by the opening up of the earth's vast subarctic regions at present almost completely sterile. 
Spectacular progress has recently been made in this direction by the agricultural scientists of the Soviet Union; and 
presumably what can be done in Siberia can also be done  in northern Canada. Powerf ul ice-breakers are already 
being used to solve the problems of transportation by sea and river; and perhaps commercial submarines, specially 
equipped for traveling under the ice may in the future insure a regular serv ice between arctic por ts and the rest of 
the world. Any increase of the world's too scanty food su pply is to be welcomed. But our rejoicings must be 
tempered by two considerations. First, the surpluses of food produced by the still hypothe tical arctic granaries of 
Siberia and Canada will have to be transferred by ship, plane and rail to the overpopulated areas of the world. This 
means that no supplies would be available in wartim e. Second, possession of food- producing arctic areas 
constitutes a natural monopoly, and this natural monopoly will no t, as in the past, be in the hands of politically 
weak nations, such as Argentina and Australia, but will be controlled by the two great power systems of the 
postwar period -- the Russian power system and the Anglo- American power system. That their monopolies of food 
surpluses will be used as weapons in the game of power politics seems more  than probable. "Lead us not into 
temptation." The opening up of the Arctic will be undoubtedly  a great good. But it will also  be a great temptation 
for the power politicians -- a temptation to exploit a natural monopoly in order to gain influence and finally control 
over hitherto independent countries, in which population has outstripped the food supply. 
 It would seem, then, that any scientific and technol ogical campaign aimed at the fostering of international 
peace and political and personal liberty must, if it is to succeed, increase the total planetary food supply by 
increasing the various regional supplies to the point of self-sufficiency. Re cent history makes it abundantly clear 
that nations, as at present constitute d, are quite unfit to have extensive commercial dea lings with one another. 
International trade has always, hitherto, gone hand in hand with war, imperialism and th e ruthless exploitation of 
industrially backward peoples by the highl y industrialized powers. Hence the de sirability of reducing international 
trade to a minimum, until such time as nationalist passions lose their intensity and it becomes possible to establish 
some form of world government. As a fi rst step in this directi on, scientific and technical means must be found for 
making it possible for even the most densely populated count ries to feed their inhabitants. The improvement of 
existing food plants and domestic animals;  the acclimatization in hitherto inhospi table regions of plants that have 
proved useful elsewhere; th e reduction of the present enormous wastes  of food by the improvement of insect 
controls and the multiplication of refrigerating units; the more systematic exploitation of seas and lakes as sources 
of food; the development of entirely new foods, such as edible yeasts; the synthesizing of sugars as a food for such 
edible yeasts; the synthesizing of chlorophyll so as to ma ke direct use of solar energy in food production -- these

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

150
are a few of the lines along which important advances might be made in a relatively short time. 
 Hardly less important than region al self-sufficiency in food is sel f-sufficiency in power for industry, 
agriculture and transportation. One of the contributing cause s of recent wars has been international competition for 
the world's strictly localized sources of petroleum, and the current jockeying for position in the Middle East, where 
all the surviving great powers have staked out claims to Persian, Mesopotamian and Arabian oil, bodes ill for the 
future. Organized science could diminish these temptati ons to armed conflict by find ing means for providing all 
countries, whatever their natural resour ces, with a sufficiency of power. Wate r power has already been pretty well 
exploited. Besides, over large areas of the earth's surf ace there are no mountains and therefore no sources of 
hydroelectric power. But across the plains where water stands almost still, the air often moves in strong and regular 
currents. Small windmills have been turning for centuries; but the use of large-scale wind turbines is still, strangely 
enough, only in the experimental stage. Until recently the direct use of sola r power has been im practicable, owing 
to the technical difficulty of constructing suitable re flectors. A few months ago, however, it was announced that 
Russian engineers had developed a cheap and simple me thod for constructing paraboloid mirrors of large size, 
capable of producing superheated steam and even of melting iron. This discovery could be made to contribute very 
greatly to the decentralization of pr oduction and population and the creation of  a new type of agrarian society 
making use of cheap and inexhaustible power for the benef it of individual small holders or self-governing, co-
operative groups. For the peoples of such tropical countr ies as India and Africa the new device for directly 
harnessing solar power should be of enormous and enduring benefit -- unless, of course, those at present possessing 
economic and political power should choose to build ma ss-producing factories around enormous mirrors, thus 
perverting the invention to their own centralistic purposes, instead of encouraging its small-scale use for the benefit 
of individuals and village communities. The technicians of solar power will be confronted with a clear-cut choice. 
They can work either for the completer enslavement of the industrially backward peoples of the tropics, or for their 
progressive liberation from the twin curses of poverty and servitude to political and economic bosses. 
 The storage of the potentialities of  power is almost as important as  the production of power. One of the 
most urgent tasks before applied science is the development of some portable source of power to replace petroleum 
-- a most undesirable fuel from the political point of view , since deposits of it are rare and unevenly distributed 
over the earth's surface, thus constitu ting natural monopolies which, when in th e hands of strong nations, are used 
to increase their strength at the e xpense of their neighbors and, when posse ssed by weak ones, are coveted by the 
strong and constitute almost irresistible temptations to im perialism and war. From the political and human point of 
view, the most desirable substitute for petroleum would be an efficient battery for storing the electric power 
produced by water, wind or the sun. Further research into  atomic structure may perhaps suggest new methods for 
the construction of such a battery. 
 Meanwhile it is possible that means may be devised, w ithin the next few years, for applying atomic energy 
to the purposes of peace, as it is now being applied to those of war. Would not this technological development 
solve the whole problem of power for industry and transporta tion? The answer to this que stion may turn out to be 
simultaneously affirmative and negative. The problems of po wer may indeed be solved -- but solved in the wrong 
way, by which I mean in a way favorable to centralization and the ruling minority, not for the benefit of individuals 
and co-operative, self-governing groups. If the raw material of atomic ener gy must be sought in radioactive 
deposits, occurring sporadically, here and there, over the earth's surface, then we have natural monopoly with all its 
undesirable political consequences, all its temptations to power politics, war, imperialistic aggression and 
exploitation. But of course it is always possible that other methods of releasing atomic energy may be discovered -- 
methods that will not involve the use of uranium. In this case there will be no natural monopoly. But the process of 
releasing atomic energy will always be a very difficu lt and complicated affair, to be accomplished only on the 
largest scale and in the most elaborately equipped factor ies. Furthermore, whatever political agreements may be 
made, the fact that atomic energy posse sses unique destructive potentialities will  always constitute a temptation to 
the boy gangster who lurks within every patriotic nationa list. And even if a world government should be set up 
within a fairly short space of time, this will not necessarily guarantee p eace. The Pax Romana was a very uneasy 
affair, troubled at almost every imperial death by civil stri fe over the question of succession. So long as the lust for 
power persists as a human trait -- and in persons of a certain kind of physique  and temperament this lust is over-
masteringly strong -- no political ar rangement, however well contrived, can guarantee peace. For such men the 
instruments of violence are as fearfully tempting as are,  to others, the bodies of wo men. Of all instruments of

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

151
violence, those powered by atomic energy are the most deci sively destructive; and for power lovers, even under a 
system of world government, the temptation to resort to these all too simple and effective means for gratifying their 
lust will be great indeed. In view of all this, we must conclude that atomic energy is, and for a long time is likely to 
remain, a source of industrial power that is, politically and humanly speaking, in the highest degree undesirable. 
 It is not necessary in this place, nor am I competen t, to enter any further into the hypothetical policy of 
internationally organized science. If that policy is to make a real cont ribution toward the maintenance of peace and 
the spread of political and personal liberty, it must be patterned throughout along the decentralist lines laid down in 
the preceding discussion of the two basic problems of f ood and power. Will scientists and technicians collaborate 
to formulate and pursue some such policy as that which has been adumbrated here? Or will they permit themselves, 
as they have done only too often in the past, to become  the conscious or unconscious instruments of militarists, 
imperialists and a ruling oligarchy of capitalistic or gover nmental bosses? Time alone will show. Meanwhile, it is 
to be hoped that all concerned will carefully consider a suggestion made by Dr. Gene Weltfish in the September, 
1945, issue of the Scientific Monthly. Before embarking upon practice, all phys icians swear a professional oath -- 
the oath of Hippocrates -- that they w ill not take improper advantage of thei r position, but always remember their 
responsibilities toward suffering humanity. Technicians and scientists, proposes Dr. Weltfish, should take a similar 
oath in some such words as the foll owing: "I pledge myself that I will use my knowledge for the good of humanity 
and against the destructive forces of the world and the ruthless intent of men; and that I will work together with my 
fellow scientists of whatever nation, creed or color for these our common ends." 
(From Science, Liberty and Peace) 
 
 
 
Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow 
 
 Between 1800 and 1900 the doctrine of Pie in the Sky gave place, in a majority of Western minds, to the 
doctrine of Pie on the Earth. The motiva ting and compensatory Future came to  be regarded, not as a state of 
disembodied happiness, to be enjoyed by me and my friends after death, but as a condition of terrestrial well-being 
for my children or (if that seemed a bit too optimistic) my grandchildren, or maybe my  great-grandchildren. The 
believers in Pie in the Sky consoled themselves for all their present miseries by the thought of posthumous bliss, 
and whenever they felt inclined to make other people mo re miserable than themselves  (which was most of the 
time), they justified their crusades a nd persecutions by proclaiming, in St. A ugustine's delicious phrase, that they 
were practicing a "benignant asperity," which would ensure  the eternal welfar e of souls through the destruction or 
torture of mere bodies in the inferior dimensions of space  and time. In our days, the re volutionary believers in Pie 
on the Earth console themselves for their miseries by thinking of the wonde rful time people will be having a 
hundred years from now, and then go on to justify wholes ale liquidations and enslavem ents by pointing to the 
nobler, humaner world which these atrocities will somehow or other call into ex istence. Not all the believers in Pie 
on the Earth are revoluti onaries, just as not all believers in Pie in  the Sky were persecut ors. Those who think 
mainly of other people's future life tend to become proselytisers, crusader s and heresy hunters. Those who think 
mainly of their own future life become resigned. The pr eaching of Wesley and his followers had the effect of 
reconciling the first generations of industrial workers to th eir intolerable lot and helped to preserve England from 
the horrors of a full-blown political revolution. 
 Today the thought of their great-g randchildren's happiness in the twen ty-first century consoles the 
disillusioned benefici aries of progress and immunizes them agai nst Communist propaganda. The writers of 
advertising copy are doing for this ge neration what the Methodists did for the victims of the first Industrial 
Revolution. 
 The literature of the Future and of that equivalent of the Future, the Remote, is enormous. By now the 
bibliography of Utopia must run into thousands of items. Moralists and politic al reformers, satirists and science 
fictioneers -- all have c ontributed their quota to the stock of imaginary worlds. Less picturesque, but more 
enlightening, than these products of phantasy and idealistic zeal are the forecasts made by sober and well-informed 
men of science. Three very important prophetic works of this kind have appe ared within the la st two or three 
years— The Challenge of Man's Future by Harrison Brown, The Foreseeable Future by Sir George Thomson, and

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

152
The Next Million Years by Sir Charles Darwin. Sir Geor ge and Sir Charles are phys icists and Mr. Brown is a 
distinguished chemist. Still more important, each of the three is something more and better than a specialist. 
 Let us begin with the longe st look into the future— The Next Million Years. Paradoxically enough, it is 
easier, in some ways, to guess what is going to happen in th e course of ten thousand centuries than to guess what is 
going to happen in the course of one century. Why is it that no fortune tellers are millionaires and that no insurance 
companies go bankrupt? Their business is the same -- foreseeing the future. But whereas the members of one group 
succeed all the time, the members of th e other group succeed, if at all, only occasionally. The reason is simple. 
Insurance companies deal with statisti cal averages. Fortune tell ers are concerned with pa rticular cases. One can 
predict with a high degree of precision what is going to happen in regard to very large numbers of things or people. 
To predict what is going to happen to any particular thing or person is for most of us quite impossible and even for 
the specially gifted minority, exceedingly difficult. The hi story of the next century involves very large numbers; 
consequently it is possible to make certain predictions about it with a fairly high degree of certainty. But though we 
can pretty confidently say that there will be revolutions, battles, massacres, hurricanes, droughts, floods, bumper 
crops and bad harvests, we ca nnot specify the dates of thes e events nor the exact loca tions, nor their immediate, 
short-range consequences. But when we  take the longer view and consider the much greater numbers involved in 
the history of the next ten thousand centuries, we find th at these ups and downs of hu man and natural happenings 
tend to cancel out, so that it becomes po ssible to plot a curve representing the average of future history, the mean 
between ages of creativity and ages of decadence, be tween propitious and unpropitious circumstances, between 
fluctuating triumph and disaster. This is the actuarial approach to prophecy -- sound on the large s cale and reliable 
on the average. It is the kind of approach which permits the prophet to say that there will be dark handsome men in 
the lives of x per cent of women, but not which particular woman will succumb. 
 A domesticated animal is an animal which has a master who is in a position to teach it tricks, to sterilize it 
or compel it to breed as he sees fit. Human beings have no masters. Even in his most highly civilized state, Man is 
a wild species, breeding at  random and always propagati ng his kind to the limit of available food supplies. The 
amount of available food may be increased by the openi ng up of new land, by the sudden disappearance, owing to 
famine, disease or war, of a considerable fraction of the population, or by improveme nts in agriculture. At any 
given period of history there is a practical limit to the food supply curren tly available. Moreover, natural processes 
and the size of the planet being what they are, there is an absolute limit, which can never be passed. Being a wild 
species, Man will always tend to breed up to the limits of the moment. Consequently very many members of the 
species must always live on the verge of starvation. This has happened in the past, is happening at the present time, 
when about sixteen hundred millions of  men, women and children are more or  less seriously undernourished, and 
will go on happening for the next million years -- by which time we may expect that the species Homo sapiens will 
have turned into some other species,  unpredictably unlike ourselves but still, of c ourse, subject to the laws 
governing the lives of wild animals. 
 We may not appreciate the fact; but a fact nevertheless it remains: we are living in a Golden Age, the most 
gilded Golden Age of human history -- not only of past history, but of future  history. For, as Sir Charles Darwin 
and many others before him have pointed out, we are liv ing like drunken sailors, like th e irresponsible heirs of a 
millionaire uncle. At an ever accelerating rate we are now squandering the capital of metallic ores and fossil fuels 
accumulated in the earth's crust during hundreds of millions  of years. How long can this spending spree go on? 
Estimates vary. But all are agreed that within a few cen turies or at most a few millennia, Man will have run 
through his capital and will be compelle d to live, for the remaining nine thousand nine hundred and seventy or 
eighty centuries of his career as Homo sapiens, stric tly on income. Sir Charles is of the opinion that Man will 
successfully make the transition from ri ch ores to poor ores and even sea water, from coal, oil, uranium and 
thorium to solar energy and alcohol deri ved from plants. About as much energy as is now available can be derived 
from the new sources -- but with a far greater expense in man hours, a mu ch larger capita l investment in 
machinery. And the same holds true of the raw materials on which industrial civilization depends. By doing a great 
deal more work than they are doing now, men will contrive  to extract the diluted dregs of the planet's metallic 
wealth or will fabricate non-me tallic substitutes for th e elements they have completely  used up. In such an event, 
some human beings will still live fair ly well, but not in the style to which we, the squanderers of planetary capital, 
are accustomed. 
 Mr. Harrison Brown has his doubts about the ability of the human race to make the transition to new and

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

153
less concentrated sources of energy and raw materials. As he sees it, there are three possibilities. "The first and by 
far the most likely pattern is a return to agrarian existen ce." This return, says Mr. Brown, will almost certainly take 
place unless Man is able not only to make the techno logical transition to new energy sources and new raw 
materials, but also to abolish war a nd at the same time stabilize his popula tion. Sir Charles, incidentally, is 
convinced that Man will never succeed in stabilizing his population. Birth control may be  practiced here and there 
for brief periods. But any nation which limits its populati on will ultimately be crowded out by nations which have 
not limited theirs. Moreover, by reducing cut-throat competi tion within the society which practices it, birth control 
restricts the action of natural selection. But wherever natural selection is not allowed free play, biological 
degeneration rapidly sets in. And then there are the short-ra nge, practical difficulties. The rulers of sovereign states 
have never been able to agree on a co mmon policy in relation to economics, to disarmament, to civil liberties. Is it 
likely, is it even conceivable, that they will agree on a common policy in relation to th e much more ticklish matter 
of birth control? The answer would seem to be in the ne gative. And if, by a miracle, th ey should agree, or if a 
world government should someday come into existence, how could a policy of birth c ontrol be enforced? Answer: 
only by totalitarian methods and, even so, pretty ineffectively. 
 Let us return to Mr. Brown and the second of his alternat ive futures. "There is a possibility," he writes, "that 
stabilization of population can be achie ved, that war can be avoided, and that the resource transition can be 
successfully negotiated. In that event mankind will be c onfronted with a pattern which looms on the horizon of 
events as the second most like ly possibility -- the completely controlle d, collectivized industr ial society." (Such a 
future society was described in my own fictional essay in Utopianism, Brave New World.) 
 "The third possibility confronting mankind is that of  a world-wide free industrial society, in which human 
beings can live in reasonable harmony with their environment." This is a cheering prospect; but Mr. Brown quickly 
chills our optimism by adding that "it is unlikely that such a pattern can exist for long. It  certainly will be difficult 
to achieve, and it clearly will be difficult to maintain once it is established." 
 From these rather dismal speculations about the remoter future it is a relief to turn to Sir George Thomson's 
prophetic view of what remains of the present Golden Age. So far as easily  available power and raw materials are 
concerned, Western man never had it so good as he has it now and, unless he shou ld choose in the interval to wipe 
himself out, as he will go on having it for the next three, or five, or perhaps even te n generations. Between the 
present and the year 2050, when the population of the planet will be at least five billions and perhaps as much as 
eight billions, atomic power will be added to the power  derived from coal, oil and falling water, and Man will 
dispose of more mechanical slaves than ever before. He will fly at three times the speed of sound, he will travel at 
seventy knots in submarine liners, he will solve hitherto insolubl e problems by means of electronic thinking 
machines. High-grade metallic ores w ill still be plentiful, and research in physics and chemistry will teach men 
how to use them more effectively and will provide at the same time a host of new synthetic materials. Meanwhile 
the biologists will not be idle. Various algae, bacteria a nd fungi will be domesticated, selectively bred and set to 
work to produce various kinds of f ood and to perform feats of chemical synthesis, which would otherwise be 
prohibitively expensive. More picturesquely (for Sir George is a man of imag ination), new breeds of monkeys will 
be developed, capable of performing the more troublesome ki nds of agricultural work, such as picking fruit, cotton 
and coffee. Electron beams will be directed onto particular areas of pl ant and animal chromosomes and, in this 
way, it may become possible to produce controlled mutati ons. In the field of medicine, cancer may finally be 
prevented, while senility ("the whole business of old ag e is odd and little understood") may be postponed, perhaps 
almost indefinitely. "Success," adds Sir George, "will come , when it does, from some quite unexpected directions; 
some discovery in physiology will alter present ideas as to how and why cells grow and divide in the healthy body, 
and with the right fundamental knowledge, enlightenment will come. It is only the rather easy superficial problems 
that can be solved by working on th em directly; others depend on still undiscovered fundamental knowledge and 
are hopeless till this has been acquired." 
 All in all, the prospects for the industrialized minority  of mankind are, in the short run, remarkably bright. 
Provided we refrain from the suicide of war, we can l ook forward to very good times indeed. That we shall be 
discontented with our good time goes w ithout saying. Every gain made by i ndividuals or societies is almost 
instantly taken for granted. The luminous ceiling toward whic h we raise our longing eyes becomes, when we have 
climbed to the next floor, a stretch of  disregarded linoleum beneath our feet. But the right to disillusionment is as 
fundamental as any other in the catalogue. (Actually the right to the pursuit of happine ss is nothing else than the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

154
right to disillusionment phrased in another way.) 
 Turning now from the industrialized minority to that vast majority inhabiting the underdeveloped countries, 
the immediate prospects are much less r eassuring. Population in these countries is increasing by more than twenty 
millions a year and in Asia at least, according to the best recent estimates, the production of food per head is now 
ten per cent less than it used to be in 1938. In India th e average diet provides about two thousand calories a day -- 
far below the optimum figure. If the country's food producti on could be raised by forty per cent -- and the experts 
believe that, given much effort and a ve ry large capital investment, it could be increased to this extent within 
fifteen or twenty years -- the available food would pr ovide the present population w ith twenty-eight hundred 
calories a day, a figure still below the optimum level. But tw enty years from now the population of India will have 
increased by something like one hundred millions, and the additional food, produced with so much effort and at 
such great expense, will add little mo re than a hundred calories to the pr esent woefully inadequate diet. And 
meanwhile it is not at all probable that a forty per cent in crease in food production will in  fact be achieved within 
the next twenty years. 
 The task of industrializing the underdeveloped count ries, and of making them capable of producing enough 
food for their peoples, is difficult in the extreme. The industrialization of the West was made possible by a series of 
historical accidents. The inventions which launched the Industrial Revoluti on were made at precisely the right 
moment. Huge areas of empty land in America and Australia were being opene d up by European colonists or their 
descendants. A great surplus of cheap food became availa ble, and it was upon this surplus that the peasants and 
farm laborers, who migrated to the towns and became f actory hands, were enabled to live and multiply their kind. 
Today there are no empty lands -- at a ny rate none that lend themselves to easy cultivation -- and the over-all 
surplus of food is small in relation to  present populations. If a million Asiatic peasants are taken off the land and 
set to work in factories, who w ill produce the food which their labor once provided? The obvious answer is: 
machines. But how can the million new factory workers make  the necessary machines if , in the meanwhile, they 
are not fed? Until they make the machines, they cannot be  fed from the land they once cultivated; and there are no 
surpluses of cheap food from other, emptier countries to support them in the interval. 
 And then there is the question of capital. "Science," you often hear it said, "will solve all our problems." 
Perhaps it will, perhaps it won't. But before science can st art solving any practical problems, it must be applied in 
the form of usable technology. But to apply science on a ny large scale is extremely expensive. An underdeveloped 
country cannot be industrialized, or given an efficient agri culture, except by the investment of a very large amount 
of capital. And what is capital? It is what is left over wh en the primary needs of a society have been satisfied. In 
most of Asia the primary needs of most of the population are never satisfied; conseque ntly almost nothing is left 
over. Indians can save about one hundredth of their per capita income. Americans can save between one tenth and 
one sixth of what they make. Since the income of American s is much higher than that of Indians, the amount of 
available capital in the United States is  about seventy times as great as the am ount of available capital in India. To 
those who have shall be given and from those who have not shall be taken away even that which they have. If the 
underdeveloped countries are to be industrialized, even pa rtially, and made self-supporting in the matter of food, it 
will be necessary to establish a vast international Marshall Plan providing subsidies in grain, money, machinery, 
and trained manpower. But all these will be of no avail,  if the population in the various underdeveloped areas is 
permitted to increase at anything like the present rate. Unle ss the population of Asia can be stabilized, all attempts 
at industrialization will be doomed to failure and the last state of all concerned will be far worse than the first -- for 
there will be many more people for famine and pestilence to destroy, together with much more political discontent, 
bloodier revolutions and more abominable tyrannies. 
(From Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

155
SECTION IV 
 
 
PSYCHOLOGY 
 
 
Madness, Badness, Sadness 
 
 Goering and Hitler displayed an almost maudlin concer n for the welfare of animals; Stalin's favorite work 
of art was a celluloid musical about Old Vienna, called The Great Waltz. And it is not only dictators who divide 
their thoughts and feelings in to unconnected, logic-tight compartments; th e whole world lives in a state of chronic 
and almost systematic inconsistency. Every society is a case of multiple personality and modulates, without a 
qualm, without even being aware of what it is up to, from Jekyll to Hyde, from  the scientist to the magician, from 
the hardheaded man of affairs to the village idiot. Ours, fo r example, is the age of unlimited violence; but it is also 
the age of the welfare state, of bird sanctuaries, of progressive education, of a gr owing concern for the old, the 
physically handicapped, the mentally sick. We build orphanages, and at the same time we stockpile the bombs that 
will be dropped on orphanages. "A foolish consistency," says Emerson, "is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored by 
little statesmen, philosophers and divines." In that case, we must be very great indeed. 
 That all, or even most, human beings will ever be  consistently humane seems very unlikely. We must be 
content with the smaller mercies of unemployment benefits  and school lunches in the midst and in spite of an 
armament race. We must console ourselves with the thought  that our inky darks are re lieved by quite a number of 
lights. 
 Between Los Angeles and Long B each, California, there stands a mental hospital which admirably 
illustrates our blessed inconsistency. Bomber plants and guided-missile laboratories surround it on every side, but 
have not succeeded in obliterating this oasis of organized and instructed benevolence. With their wide lawns, their 
tree-lined walks, their scattering of nondescript bu ildings, the hospital grounds look like the campus of an 
unpretentious college. The inmates, unfortunately, could never be mistaken for undergraduates and co-eds. The 
mind is its own place, and their gait, their posture, the distre ssed or remotely preoccupied expression of their faces 
reveal them as the inhabitants of dark  worlds, full of confusion, fertile in private terrors. But at least nothing is 
being done in this green oasis among the jets and the rockets to de epen the confusion or in tensify the terrors. On 
the contrary, much good will and intelligence, much know ledge and skill are going into a concerted effort to 
transform their isolated, purgatorial universes into something happier and more accessible. 
 Not long ago a psychiatrist friend took me with him to  this oasis. Walking through one of the Disturbed 
Wards, I found myself suddenly remembering the first occasion on which I had visited a mental hospital. The place 
was Kashmir, the time more than thirty years ago, and the hospital was actually no hosp ital, but that part of the 
local prison which was used for the confinement of maniacs. Naked, unkempt, horribly unwashed, these 
unfortunates were shut up in cages. Not the spacious encl osures reserved, in zoos, fo r gibbons and orangutans, but 
filthy little pens, in which a couple of steps in any dire ction would bring their occupa nts to the confining bars. 
Kashmir is remote, "uncivilized," non-Christian. But let us be in no hurry to flatter ourselves. The horrors I 
witnessed there, among the Himalayas, were of exactly th e same kind as the horrors which my grandfather and his 
contemporaries could see in any asylum in civilized and Christian England, France or Germany, in civilized and 
Christian America. Of the many dark and hideous pages of our history, few are more sh ameful than the record of 
Western man's treatment of the mentally ill. The story has been told at length in Doctor Gregory Zilboorg's History 
of Medical Psychology and there are whole libraries of books dealing w ith special periods and particular aspects of 
the long martyrdom of the insane. 
 The tormentors of the insane have  been drawn, in the main, from two professions -- the medical and the 
clerical. To which shall we award the palm? Have clergym en been responsible for more gratuitous suffering than 
doctors? Or have doctors made up for a certain lack of intensity in their br and of torture (after all, they never went 
so far as to burn anyone alive for being mad) by its longe r duration and the greater number of the victims to whom 
it was applied? It is a nice point. To prevent hard feelings, let us divide the prize equally between the contenders. 
 So far as the mentally sick are concerned, Western history has had only two golden ages. The first lasted

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

156
from about fifty years before the birt h of Christ into the s econd century of our era; the second began, very 
hesitantly, in the early years of the nineteenth century and is still continuing. During these golden ages the mentally 
sick, or at least the more fortunate of them in the more  civilized parts of the clas sical and modern world, were 
treated with a measure of common decency, as though they were unfortunate human beings. During the intervening 
centuries they were either ignored, or else systematically tormented, fi rst (on the highest th eological grounds) by 
the clergy, later (for the soundest of medical reasons) by the doctors. 
 Let us ask ourselves a question. If I had lived in the eightee nth century, and if I had been afflicted by some 
mental illness, what would have happened to me? 
 What happened to you in those days depended, first of all, on the fina ncial situation of your family. People 
with money either locked up their insane  relatives in some remote corner of the family mansion, or banished them, 
with a staff of attendants, to an isolated cottage in the country, or else boarded them out, at considerable expense, 
in a private madhouse run for profit by a doctor or, under medical supervision, by some glorified jailer. Lunatics 
confined in the attics (like Mr. Rochester's wife in Jane Eyre) or in a country cottage we re spared the rigors of 
medical treatment, which could only be administered in  an institution staffed by brawny attendants and equipped 
with the instruments of coercion. Those who were sent to such an institut ion were first stripped naked. Mad people 
were generally kept in a state of partial or complete  nudity. Nakedness solved the pr oblem of soiled clothes and 
contributed, in what was felt to  be a most salutary way, to the patient's sense of degradation and inferiority. After 
being stripped, the patient was shaved, so as to prepare him or her for that part of the treatment which consisted in 
rubbing various salves into the scalp with a view to soothing or stimulating the brain. Then he or she was taken to a 
cell, tied down to the bed and locked in for the night. If the patient struggled and screamed, that was a sign of 
mania; if he reacted with silent resignation, he was obvi ously suffering from some form of melancholy. In either 
case he needed treatment and, duly, next morning the tr eatment was commenced. In the medical literature of the 
time it was referred to as "Reducing the Patient by Physic."  Over a period of eight or  ten weeks the victim was 
repeatedly bled, at least one pound of blood being taken on each occasion. Once a week, or if the doctor thought it 
advisable at shorter intervals,  h e  o r  s h e  w a s  g i v e n  a n  e m e t i c  - -  a  " B r i s k  V o m i t "  a s  o u r  a n c e s t o r s ,  w i t h  t h e i r  
admirable command of English, liked to  call it. The favorite Brisk Vomit wa s a concoction of the roots of black 
hellebore. Hellebore had been used in the treatment of  the insane since the time of Melampus, a legendary 
soothsayer, first mentioned by Homer. Taken internally, th e toxicologists tell us, hellebo re "occasions ringing in 
the ears, vertigo, stupor, thir st, with a feeling of suff ocation, swelling of the tongue and fauces, emesis and 
catharsis, slowing of the pulse and fina lly collapse and death from cardiac para lysis. Inspection after death reveals 
much inflammation of the stomach and intestines, more es pecially the rectum." The doses prescribed by the old 
psychiatrists were too small to be fatal, but quite large enough to produce a dangerous syndrome, known in medical 
circles as "helleborism." Every admini stration of the drug resulted in an iatr ogenic (doctor-induced) disease of the 
most distressing and painful kind. One Brisk Vomit was more than enough; there were no volunteers for a second 
dose. All the later administrations of he llebore had to be fo rcible. After five or six bout s of helleborism, the time 
was ripe for purgatives. Senna, rhubarb, sulphur, colocynth, antimony, aloes --  blended into Black Draughts or 
worked up into enormous boluses, these violent cathartics were forced, day after day, dow n the patient's throat. At 
the end of the two-month course of bloodlettings, vomits and purges, most psychotics were "reduced by physic" to 
a point where they were in no condition to give trouble . These reductions were repeated every spring during the 
patient's incarceration and in the meantime he was kept on a low diet, deficient in pr oteins, vitamins and even 
calories. It is a tes timony to the amazing toughness of  the human species that many ps ychotics survived under this 
treatment for decades. Indeed, they did more than surviv e; in spite of chronic undernourishment and periodical 
reductions by physic, some of them still found the strength to  be violent. The answer to violence was mechanical 
restraint and corporal punishment. "I  have seen," wrote Dorothea Dix in 1848, "more than nine thousand idiots, 
epileptics and insane in the United States, destitute of a ppropriate care and protectio n, bound with galling chains, 
bowed beneath fetters and heavy iron balls  attached to drag chains, lacerated with ropes, scourged with rods and 
terrified beneath storms of execratio n and cruel blows." The armamentarium of an English asylum of the Early 
Victorian period comprised "strait-wais tcoats, handcuffs, leg lock s, various coarse device s of leather and iron, 
including gags and horrible screws to force open the mout hs of patients who were unwilling or even unable to take 
food." In the Lancaster Asylum good old- fashioned chains had been ingeniously combined with the very latest in 
plumbing. In 1840 its two Restraint Rooms were fitted up with  "rows of stalled seats serving the double purpose of

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

157
a water closet and an ordinary seat. The patients were secured by hand locks to the upper portion of the stalls and 
by leg locks to the lower portion." The Lancaster lunatics were relatively well off. The toilets to which they were 
chained guaranteed a certain cleanline ss and the newly installed heating syst em, of which the asylum was justly 
proud, preserved them from the long-drawn torture-by-freezing, which was the lot, each whiter, of the 
overewhelming majority of mentally sick paupers. For while the private madhouses provided a few of the 
rudimentary creature comforts, the public  asylums and workhouses, in which th e psychotic "Objects of Charity" 
were confined, were simply dungeons. (In official document s the phrase, "Objects of Charity" is abbreviated, and 
the insane poor are regularly referred to as "Objects.") "I have seen them naked," wrote Esquirol of the Objects in 
French asylums, "and protected only by straw from the da mp, cold pavement on which they were lying." And here 
is William Tuke's account of what he saw in the lunati c ward of an English workhouse in 1811: "The poor women 
were absolutely without any clothes. The weather was in tensely cold, and the evening previous to our visit the 
thermometer had been sixteen degrees below freezing. One of these forlorn Objects lay buried under a miserable 
covering of straw, without a blanket or even a horsecloth to  defend her from the cold." The feet of chained lunatics 
often became frostbitten. From frostbite to gangrene was a short step, and from gang rene through amputation to 
death was only a little longer. 
 Lunatics were not merely confined. Attempts were even made to cure them. The procedures by which 
patients were reduced to physical exhaustion were also supposed to restore them to sanity. Psychoses were thought 
to be due to an imbalance between the four humors of th e body, together with a local ex cess or deficiency of the 
vital and animal spirits. The bloodlettings, the vomits an d the purges were intended to rid the viscera and the 
circulatory system of peccant humors, and at the same time to relieve the pressure of the animal spirits upon the 
brain. Physical treatment wa s supplemented by psychological treatment. This last was based upon the universally 
accepted principle that the most effective cure for insanity is terror. Boerhaave, the most influential medical teacher 
of the first half of the eighteenth cent ury, instructed his pupils "t o throw the Patient into the Sea, and to keep him 
under for as long as he can possibly bear without being stifled." In the intervals between duckings the mentally sick 
were to be kept in constant fear by the threat of punishment. The simple st and handiest form of punishment is 
beating, and beating, in consequence, was regularly resorted to. During his psychotic episodes even George III was 
beaten -- with the permission, of course, of his Privy Council and both Hous es of Parliament. But beating "was 
only one form, and that the slightest, of cruelty toward the insane." (I quote the words of the great French reformer, 
Doctor Pinel.) "The inventions to give pain were trul y marvelous." Thus an eminent German doctor had devised a 
therapeutic punishment, which c onsisted in tying a r ope about the patient's middle, hoisting him to a great height 
and then lowering him very rapidly, so that he should have  the sensation of falling, into  a dark cellar, "which was 
to be all the better if it could be stocked with serpents." A very similar torture is minutely described by the Marquis 
de Sade, the heroine of whose novel, Justine, is punished for being virtuous (among many other ways) by being 
dangled halfway down a shaft opening into  a cavern full of rats and corpses,  while her tormentor of the moment 
keeps threatening, from above, to cut th e rope. That this fiendish notion should have occurred not only to the most 
famous psychotic of the period, but also to one of its leading psychiatrists, throws  a revealing light on our 
ancestors' attitude toward the mentally sick. In relation to these predestined victims sadistic behavior was right and 
proper, so much so that it could be publicly avowed and rationalized in terms of current scientific theories. 
 So much for what would have happened to me, if I ha d become mentally sick in the eighteenth, or even the 
first half of the nineteenth, century. If I had lived in the sixteenth century, my fate might have been even worse. For 
in the sixteenth century most of the symptoms of mental  illness were regarded as supernatural in origin. For 
example, the pathological refusal or in ability to speak was held to be a sure sign of diabolic possession. Mutism 
was frequently punished by the inflicti on of torture and death at  the stake. Dumb devils are mentioned in the 
Gospels; but the evangelists made no mention of anothe r hysterical symptom, locali zed insensibility to pain. 
Unfortunately for the mentally ill, the Early Fathers noticed this curious phenomenon. For them, the insensitive 
spots on the body of a mentally sick pe rson were "the Devil's stigmata," th e marks with which Satan branded his 
human cattle. In the sixteenth century anyone suspected of witchcraft would be  systematically pricked with an awl 
or bodkin. If an insensitive spot were found, it was clear th at the victim was allied with the devil and must 
therefore be tortured and bur ned alive. Again, some mentally sick pers ons hear voices, see visions of sinister 
figures, have phantasies of omnipotence or alternatively of persecution, believe themselves to be capable of flying, 
of being subject to metamorphosis into animals. In the sixteenth century these common symptoms of mental

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

158
derangement were treated as so many st atements of objective f act, so many confessions, explicit or implicit, of 
collaboration with the Enemy. But, obviously, anyone who collaborated with the Devil had to be tortured and 
burned alive. And what about the neurotics, particularly  the female neurotics, who suffer from sexual illusions. 
"All witchcraft," proclaim the learned clerical authors of the Malleus Maleficarum, the standard textbook for 
sixteenth-century inquisitors and ma gistrates, "all witchcraft comes from carnal lust, which in women is 
insatiable." From this it followed th at any disturbed woman, whose sexual da ydreams were more than ordinarily 
vivid, was having relations with an Incubus. But an Incubu s is a devil. Therefore she too must be tortured and 
burned alive. 
 Doctor Johann Weier, who has be en called the Father of Psychiat ry, had the humanity, courage and 
common sense to assail the theories and hellish practices of the Catholic theologians and magistrates, and the no-
less-ferocious Protestant witch-hunters of his time. But the majority even  of well-educated men approved the 
crimes and follies of the Church. For having ventured to treat the witches' confessions  as symptoms of mental 
illness, Weier was regarded as a diabolical fellow traveler, even a full-blown sorcerer. That he was not arrested, 
tortured and burned was due to the fact that he was the personal physician of a ruling prince. Weier died in his bed; 
but his book was placed on the Index, a nd the persecution of the mentally ill continued, unabated, for another 
century. How many witches were tortured  and burned during the sixteenth cen tury is not exactly known. The total 
number is variously estimated at anything from one hundred thousand to several millions. Many of the victims 
were perfectly sane adherents of the old fertility cult whic h still lingered on in every part of Europe. Of the rest, 
some were persons incriminated by informers, some the unhappy victims of a mental illness. "If we took the whole 
of the population of our present-day hosp itals for mental diseases," writes Dr . Zilboorg, "and if we sorted out the 
cases of dementia praecox, some of the senile psychoses, some of those afflicted with general paralysis, and some 
of the so-called involution melancholie s, we should see that Bodin (the gr eat French jurist, who denounced Dr. 
Weier as a sorcerer and heretic) would not have hesitated to pl ead for their death at the stake, so similar and 
characteristic are their trends to those he describes. It is truly striking that the ideationa l contents of the mental 
diseases of four hundred years ago are so similar to those of today." 
 In the second half of the seventeenth century the ment ally sick ceased to be the prey of the clergy and the 
theologically minded lawyers, and were left instead to the tender mercies of the doctors. The crimes and follies 
committed in the name of Galen were, as we have seen, almost as monstrous as thos e committed at an earlier 
period in the name of God. Improvement came at last in the closing years of the eighteenth century, and was due to 
the efforts of a few nonconforming individu als, some of them doctors, others outside the pale of medicine. These 
nonconformists did their work in the teeth of official i ndifference, sometimes of activ e official resistance. As 
corporations, neither the Church nor the medical professi on ever initiated any reform in the treatment of the 
mentally sick. Obscure priests and nuns  had often cared for the insane with  kindness and understanding; but the 
theological bigwigs thought of mental illness in terms of diabolic possession, heresy and apostasy. It was the same 
with the medical bigwigs. Strait jackets, Brisk Vomits and systematic terrorism remained the official medical 
policy until well into the nineteenth century. It was only tardily and relu ctantly that the bigwigs accepted the 
reforms initiated by heroic nonconformists, and officially changed their old, bad tune. 
 Reform began almost simultaneously on either side of  the Channel. In England a Quaker merchant, William 
Tuke, set up the York Retreat, a hospital for the ment ally sick, in which restra int was never used and the 
psychological treatment was aimed, not at frightening the patients, but at bringing them back from their isolation 
by persuading them to work, play, eat, talk and worship t ogether. In France the pione er in reform was Doctor 
Philippe Pinel, who was appointed to the direction of the Bicetre Asylum in Paris at the height of the French 
Revolution. Many of the patients were kept permanently ch ained in unlighted cells. Pinel asked permission of the 
revolutionary government to set them free. It was refused. Liberty, Equality and Frater nity were not for lunatics. 
Pinel insisted, and at last permission was grudgingly given. The account of what followed is touching in the 
extreme. "The first man on whom the experiment was tried was an English captain, whose history no one knew, as 
he had been in chains for forty years. He was thought to be one of the most furious among them. His keepers 
approached him with caution, as he had in a fit of fury killed one of them on the spot with a blow from his 
manacles. He was chained more rigorously than any of the others. Pinel entered his cell unattended and calmly said 
to him, 'Captain, I will order your chains to be taken off and give you liberty to walk in the court, if you will 
promise me to behave well and injure no one.' 'Yes, I promise,' said the maniac. 'But you are laughing at me. . .' His

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

159
chains were removed and the keepers re tired, leaving the door of his cell open. He raised himself many times from 
the seat, but fell again on it; for he had been in a sitting postu re so long that he had lost the use of his legs. In a 
quarter of an hour he succeeded in maintaining his balanc e and with tottering steps came to the door of his dark 
cell. His first look was at the sky, and he exclaimed, 'How beautiful, how beautiful!' During the rest of the day he 
was constantly in motion, uttering exclamations of delight. In the evening he re turned of his own accord to his cell 
and slept tranquilly." 
 In Europe the pioneer work of Tuke and Pinel was continued by Conolly, Esquirol and a growing number 
of their followers in every country. In America, the stan dard bearer of reform was a heroic woman, Dorothea Dix. 
By the middle of the century many of the worst abominations of the old regime were things of the past. The 
mentally ill began to be treated as unfortunate human beings, not as Objects. It was an immense advance; but it was 
not yet enough. Reform had produced institutional care, but  still no adequate treatment. For most nineteenth-
century doctors, things were more real  than thoughts and the study of matter seemed more scientific than the study 
of mind. The dream of Victorian medici ne was, in Zilboorg's phrase, to develop a psychiatry that should be 
completely independent of psychology. Hence the widespread  and passionate rejection of the procedures lumped 
under the names of Animal Magnetism and Hypnotism. In  France, Charcot, Liebault and Bernheim achieved 
remarkable results with hypnos is; but the intellectually re spectable psychiatrists of Europe and America turned 
their backs on this merely psychological treatment of mental illness and concentrated instead on the more 
"objective," the more "scientific" methods of surgery. 
 It had all happened before, of course. Cutting holes in the skull was an immemorially ancient form of 
psychiatry. So was castration, as a cu re for epilepsy. Continuing this gra nd old tradition, the Victorian doctors 
removed the ovaries of their hysteri cal patients and treated neurosis in young girls by the gruesome operation 
known to ethnologists as "female circumcision." In the early years of the present century Metchnikoff was briefly a 
prophet, and autointoxication was all the rage in medical circles. Al ong with practically ev ery other disease, 
neuroses were supposed to be due to intestinal stasis. No intestine, no stasis -- what could be more logical? The 
lucky neurotics who could afford a major operation went to hospital, had their colons cut out and the end of their 
small intestines stitched to the stump. Those who recovered found them selves with yet another reason for being 
neurotic: they had to hurry to the bathroom six or eight tim es a day. Intestinal stasis went out with the hobble skirt, 
and the new vogue was focal infection. According to the surgical psychiatrists, people were neurotic not because of 
conflicts in their uncons cious mind, but because of infla mmation in their tonsils or abs cesses at the roots of their 
teeth. The dentists, the nose-and-throat men set to work w ith a will. Toothless and tonsilectomized, the neurotics, 
needless to say, went on behaving just as neurotically as ever. Focal infections followed intestinal stasis into 
oblivion, and the surgical psyc hiatrists now prefer to make a direct a ssault upon the brain. The current fashion is 
shock treatment or, on great occasions , prefrontal lobotomy. M eanwhile the pharmacologists have not been idle. 
The barbiturates, hailed not so long ago as panaceas, have given place to Chlorpromazine, Reserpine, Frenquel and 
Miltown. Insofar as they facili tate the specifically psycho logical treatment of mental disorders, these tranquilizers 
may prove to be extremely valuable. Even as symptom stoppers they have their uses. 
 The green oasis among the jets and the rockets is crammed to overflowing. So are all the other mental 
hospitals of the Western world. Technological and ec onomic progress seems to ha ve been accompanied by 
psychological regress. The incidence of neuroses and psychoses is apparently on the increase. Still larger hospitals, 
yet kinder treatment of patients, more psychiatrists and better pills -- we need them all and need them urgently. But 
they will not solve our problem. In this field prevention is incomparably more important than cure; for cure merely 
returns the patient to an environment which begets mental  illness. But how is prevention to be achieved? That is 
the sixty-four-billion-dollar question. 
(From Esquire Magazine) 
 
 
A Case of Voluntary Ignorance 
 
 That men do not learn very much from the lessons of history is the most important of all the lessons that 
history has to teach. Si vis pacem, the Romans liked to say, para bellum -- if you want peace prepare for war. For 
the last few thousand years the rulers  of all the world's empi res, kingdoms and republic s have acted upon this

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

160
maxim -- with the result, as Professor Sorokin has laborio usly shown, that every civilized nation has spent about 
half of every century of its existe nce waging war with its neighbors. But has mankind learned this lesson of 
history? The answer is emphatically in the negative. Si vis pacem, para bellum still is the watchword of every 
sovereign state, with the possible exception of M onaco. Again, what happens when economic power is 
concentrated in a few hands? History's answer to that quest ion is that, whatever else it may be, that which happens 
is most certainly not democracy. But while politicians ev erywhere proclaim the virtues of democracy (even the 
totalitarian states are People's Republic s), advancing technology is everywhere  allowed and even encouraged to 
work for the concentration of economic power. Small-scale operators in agriculture a nd industry are progressively 
eliminated, and in their place advancing technology instal ls an oligarchy of giant concerns, owned and operated 
either by private corporations and their managers, or by the state and its bureaucrats. 
 It is interesting to note that the men who, in the t eeth of history, proclaimed that, if you want peace, you 
must prepare for war, were the self-same men w ho solemnly declared that Experience teaches, experientia docet-- 
or, as Mrs. Micawber more aptly put it, "Experientia does it." But as a matter of brute historical fact, Experientia 
generally doesn't. We got on doing what our own and our fa ther's experience has demonstrated, again and again, to 
be inappropriate or downright disastrous; and we go on hoping (this time like Mr. Micawber) that "something will 
turn up" -- something completely diff erent from anything which, on the basis of  experience, we have any right to 
expect. Needless to say, it does not turn up. The same old mistakes have the same old consequences and we remain 
in the same old mess. 
 And even when we do permit ourselves to be taught by experience, as embodied in our own or our society's 
history, how slow, in all too many cases, how grudging and reluctant is the process of learning! True, we learn very 
quickly the things we really want to learn. But the only things we really want to learn are the things which satisfy 
our physical needs, the things which arouse and justify our darling passions, and the things which confirm us in our 
intellectual prejudices. Thus, in any field of science, new facts and new hypotheses are accepted quickly and easily 
by those whose metaphysical beliefs happen to be compatible  with the new material. Th ey are rejected (or, if 
accepted, accepted very slowly and grudgingly) by those into  whose philosophy the new material cannot be fitted -
- those, in a word, whose intellectual presuppositions are outraged by the facts and hypotheses in question. To take 
an obvious example, the evolutionary hypothesis and the factual evidence on which it wa s based were rejected by 
the Fundamentalists, or accepted only in a Pickwickian sens e and after years of stubborn resistance. In precisely 
the same way the dogmatic materialists of our own day refuse to accept the factual evidence for ESP, or to consider 
the hypotheses based upon that evidence. From their own expe rience or from the recorded  experience of others 
(history), men learn only what their passions and their metaphysical prejudices allow them to learn. 
 A wonderfully instructive example of this truth is pr ovided by the history of hypnotism in its relations with 
orthodox medicine -- the histor y, that is to say, of an extremely odd and still unexplained phenomenon in its 
relations with a body of anatomical and physiological facts, with certain officially sanctioned methods of 
treatment, with a system (in part exp licit, in part tacit and un expressed) of metaphysical beliefs, and with the men 
who have held the beliefs and used the methods. At the time of writing (the Summer of 1956) hypnotism is in fairly 
good odor among medical men. During World War II it was extensively used in the treatment of the psychosomatic 
symptoms produced by so-called "battle fatigue." And at th e present time it is being used by a growing number of 
obstetricians to prepare expectant mothers for childbirth and to make that blessed ev ent more bearable, and by a 
growing number of dentists to eliminate the pain of probing and drilling. Most ps ychiatrists, it is true, fight shy of 
it; but for that overwhelming majority of neurotics who cannot afford to  spend two or three years and seven or 
eight thousand dollars on a conventional analysis, hypnotic treatment, mainly at the hands of lay therapists, is being 
made increasingly available. And now le t us listen to what a distinguished anesthesiolo gist, Doctor Milton J. 
Manner of Los Angeles, has to say about the value of hypnot ism in his special field. "Hypnotism is the best way to 
make a patient fearless before surgery, painless during it and comfortable after it." Dr. Manner adds that, in severe 
operations, "perfect anesthesia should be attained by employing hypnotism in c onjunction with chemical agents. It 
can then be a pleasant experience, i nvolving no tension or apprehension." But, it may be asked, why bother with 
hypnotism, when so many and such excellent chemical anesthetics lie ready to hand? For the good reason, says Dr. 
Manner, that hypnotism "places no extra load on circulatio n, breathing, or on the liver and kidney systems." In a 
word, it is entirely non-toxic. Hypnotism, he adds, is ep ecially valuable in operati ons on children. Children who 
have been hypnotized into unconsciousness are more cheerf ul after surgery, "m ore alert, more responsive, more

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

161
comfortable and more co-operative than those who undergo anesthesia produced by chemicals alone." Patients who 
have suffered severe burns are in constant pain, greatly  depressed and without appetite. Hypnotism will relieve 
pain, improve morale and restore appetite, thereby grea tly accelerating the process of healing. Alone or in 
conjunction with relatively small amount s of chemical anesthetics, hypnotism has been used by Dr. Marmer in 
every kind of surgical situation, incl uding even the removal of a tumor from the lung. Every anesthesiologist, Dr. 
Marmer concludes, should also be a hypnotist. 
 So much for hypnotism today. Now let us turn back to the past and see what lessons the history of 
hypnotism has to teach. Among the books in my library are two rather battered volumes— Mesmerism in India, by 
James Esdaile, M.D., first published in 1846, and Mesmerism, in its Relation to  Health and Disease, and the 
Present State of Medicine, by William Neilson, published at Edinburgh in 1855. Esdaile was a Scottish physician 
and surgeon, who went out to India as a young man and was put in charge of two hospitals in Bengal -- one a 
hospital for prisoners in the local jail, the other a charity  hospital for the general pub lic. In these hospitals and, 
later, in a hospital at Calcutta, Esdaile performed more than three hundred major operations on patients in a state of 
hypnotic (or as it was then called, "mesmeric" or "magnetic") anesthesia. These operations included amputations of 
limbs, removals of cancerous breasts, numerous operations fo r varicocele, cataract and chronic ulcers, removals of 
tumors in the throat and mouth, and of the enormous tu mors, weighing from thirty to more than a hundred pounds 
apiece, caused by elephantiasis, then exceedingly prevalent in Bengal. Esdaile's Indian patients felt no pain, even 
during the most drastic opera tions. What was still more remarkable, they  survived. In 1846 -- the year in which 
Esdaile published his book -- Semmelwei ss had not yet taught his students to  wash their hands when they came 
from the dissecting room to the maternity ward, Pasteur wa s years away from his discove ry of bacterial infection, 
Lister, a mere boy in his teens. Surgery was strictly sept ic. In the words of a histor ian of medicine, "suppuration 
and septic poisonings of the system carried away even  the most promising patients and followed even trifling 
operations. Often, too, these diseases rose to the height of epidemic pestilence s, so that patien ts, however extreme 
their need, feared the very name of hospital, and the most  skillful surgeons distrusted their own craft." Before the 
advent of ether and chloroform (whi ch began to be used about 1847), the mortality of patien ts after surgery 
averaged twenty-nine per cent in a well -run hospital and would rise, when the streps and staphs were more than 
usually active, to over fifty per cent. Chloroform changed the techniques of surgery, but not, to any marked extent, 
its results. The agonies of the fully conscious patient "h ad naturally and rightly compelled the public to demand 
rapid if not slapdash surgery, and the surgeon to pride himself on it. Within decent limits of precision, the quickest 
craftsman was the best." (There were famous specialists  who could perform an operation for stone in fifty-eight 
seconds flat.) Thanks to chloroform, "the surgeon was enabled to  be not only as cautious and sedulous as he was 
dexterous, but also to venture on lon g, profound and intricate operations which, before the coming of anesthetics, 
had been out of the question. But unfortunately this new enfranchisement seemed to be  but an ironic liberty of 
Nature, who with the other hand took away what she ha d given." Bigger and better operations were performed 
under chemical anesthesia, but the patie nts went on dying at almost the same  ghastly rate. In the twenty years 
following the introduction of chloroform and preceding List er's advocacy of aseptic surgery, the death rate from 
postoperative infections fell by only six percentage points -- from twenty-nin e in every hundred cases to twenty-
three. In other words, almost a quarter of every Early Vi ctorian surgeon's clients were still regularly slaughtered. 
Chloroform had abolished the pain of operations, but not th e virtual certainty of infec tion afterwards, nor the one-
in-four chance of a lingering and unpleasant death. 
 Meanwhile, what was happening in Benga l? The answer is startling in the extreme. In a debilitating climate 
and among sickly and undernourished pa tients, Doctor Esdaile was performi ng major surgery without any deaths 
on the operating table (a distressingly frequent event in the early days of badly admi nistered chloroform) and with 
a mortality from postoperative infection of only five per cen t. How are we to account for this extraordinary state of 
affairs? First of all, Esdaile never allowed his patients' morale to be undermined by apprehension. The men and 
women who came to him were not told in advance when they  were to be operated, nor even, in many cases, that an 
operation would be necessary. After examination by the surg eon, they were taken into a dark room, asked to lie 
down on a couch, and then put to sleep by "magnetic passes," which were made  by relays of orderlies, who would 
work on the patient, if it seemed necessary, for three and four hours at a stretch. When the passes had taken effect 
and the patient was in a deep hypnotic coma, he would be taken into the operating room, have his leg cut off, or his 
forty-pound elephantiasis tumor removed, be stitched up and carried, still unconscious, to his bed. In most cases

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

162
patients remained in trance for several hours after be ing operated, and would wake up unaware of what had 
happened and feeling no pain whatever. In the days that  followed they were frequently re-mesmerized, and so 
spent most of their time in a state of tran ce. But in trance, as in natural sleep, the vis medicatrix naturae, nature's 
healing power, is able to do its work with the greatest possible effectiveness. The agitated and anxious ego is put to 
sleep and can make no trouble; left to its  own devices, the autonomic system or Vegetative Soul (as it used to be 
called) goes about its business with infallib le skill. In order to be freed from pain and self-consciousness, Esdaile's 
patients did not have to be poisoned by narcotics and analgesics; thanks to hypnotism, they were spared most of the 
miseries that normally follow an operati on, and, thanks to hypnotism,  their resistance was rais ed to such an extent 
that they could easily get the better of the deadly microorganisms associated with septic surgery. 
 Five deaths to every hundred operations -- it was the biggest medical news since the days of Hippocrates! 
But when Esdaile published the facts, what happened? Were his colleagues delighted? Did they hasten in a body to 
follow his example? Not at all. Most of them were extr emely angry when they heard of his achievement, and the 
bigwigs of the faculty did everything in their power to prevent Dr. Esdaile from con tinuing his beneficient work 
and, when that proved impossible (for Esdaile was backed up by the Governor General of India), to suppress the, to 
them, embarrassing and distasteful facts. 
 Doctor James Simpson, the first surg eon to advocate the use of chloroform and a most courageous crusader, 
in the teeth of Fundamentalist opposition, for painless chil dbirth, was at first intensely interested in mesmeric 
anesthesia. In a letter to Esdaile he wrote that he had "always considered the few deaths out of so many formidable 
operations one of the most remarkable things in the hist ory of surgery." Furthermore, says Esdaile, "Dr. Simpson 
sent me a message that I owed it to myself and my profession to let my proceedings be known in England, and that, 
if I wrote an article, he would get it published in the journal he was connected with. I therefore sent him an account 
of one hundred and sixty-one scrotal tumors removed in the mesmeric trance." This paper was rejected on the 
ground that parts of it had appe ared (in a greatly garbled form) in anothe r medical journal. "A  more general paper 
was offered; but after some compliments and considerable delay," Esdaile was informed that Dr. Simpson's brother 
editors had declined it as "not being sufficiently practical."  "One of the most remarkable  things in the history of 
surgery!" is Neilson's justifiably bitter comment. "Namel y, how to reduce 23 per cent of  deaths to 5 per cent -- not 
practical." And he adds that "it is very curious that, when Dr. Simpson professed to publ ish an account of all the 
means that have ever been used to prevent the pain of operations, he quite forgot to mention mesmerism." 
 This sort of thing had happened before Esdaile's day and was destined to happen again, and yet again, 
thereafter. Doctor John Elliotson, an eminent physician a nd Professor of Physiology at the University of London, 
had been derided and boycotted for his advocacy of mesmerism in surgery and general practice. Some of his critics 
had gone so far as to assert that a mesmerized man who had a leg amputated without showing the slightest sign of 
discomfort was a mere impostor -- pret ending that he felt no pain just to annoy the or thodox doctors. And one of 
them, Doctor Copland, solemnly declared that "pai n is a wise provision of  Nature; and patients ought to suffer 
pain, while their surgeon is operating; they are all the better for it and recover better." Later on, when the anesthetic 
properties of ether and chloroform had been discovered, th e first reaction of many doctors  was not to give thanks 
that the pain of operations had been abolished. No, their first reaction was to gloat over the discomfiture of the 
mesmerists. "Hurrah!" wrote Robert Listen, the first surge on to perform an operati on under ether. "Rejoice! 
Mesmerism and its professors have me t with a heavy blow and great disc ouragement." More soberly, but with 
equal satisfaction, the official Lancet smugly editorialized: "We suppose that we  shall hear no more of mesmerism 
and its absurdities." And, in e ffect, the absurdity of a five  per cent death rate was not heard of again until Lister 
discovered that, if the surgeon used aseptic methods, the pa tient could survive in spite of lowered resistance and 
systematic poisoning by chemical anesthetics, narcotics and analgesics. 
 But mesmerism and its absurdities were observable facts and, in spit e of everything, they refused to 
disappear. It therefore became necessary to legislate against them. For almost half a century after the publication of 
Esdaile's book, any English doctor who made use of hypnotism ran the risk of being hounded out of his profession. 
It was not until 1892 that the British Medical Association o fficially admitted the reality of hypnosis and officially 
sanctioned hypnotic treatment. 
 In France hypnotism fared better than in England. The first Royal Commission on Mesmerism (of which 
Benjamin Franklin was a member) had denied the exis tence of the "magnetic fluid," which was supposed to 
account for the phenomena of hypnotism, but had not pronounced on the reality of the physical and psychological

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

163
phenomena induced by mesmeric procedures. The second commission pronounced in favor of mesmeric treatment. 
The third, dominated by the orthodox party, pronounced agai nst mesmerism. Later, Charcot tried to prove that 
hypnosis was a form of hysterical epileps y. But in spite of ev erything the practice of hypnotism continued and, at 
the close of the nineteenth century, wa s being extensively used for the relief  of pain and the cure of sickness. 
Today, strangely enough, hypnotism is al most unknown among medical circles in France. It is as though such 
pioneers as Liebault and Bernheim had lived and labored in vain. The remarkable successes achieved by those men 
and their followers have been more or less completely forgotten. 
 These ups and downs in the popularity of hypnotism are characteristic of its hist ory in every country. At 
one moment hypnotism seems to be on the point of entering medicine as a widely used form of therapy; then, a few 
years later, the public and the professional men seem to lose interest in this kind of treatment, which is either 
quietly ignored or else denounced as dangerous or vaguely immoral. In th e United States, for example, hypnotism 
enjoyed wide popularity in  the years following the Civil War. Three quar ters of a century a go the editor of the 
American edition of Deleuze's Treatise on Animal Magnetism could write as follows: "Probably there is not a city 
nor village in North America where there could not be  found at this time -- 1878 -- one or more magnetizers. 
Usually one is to be found in every family." Very few of these magnetizers were medi cal men; for most American 
doctors disapproved of hypnotism almost as heartily as did their British colleagues. Bu t, medical or non-medical, 
the hypnotists existed and were  evidently plentiful. By the turn of the century, how ever, the American magnetizer 
was already a rare bird, and by the earl y Twenties the species was almost extinct. Today, it seems to be on its way 
back. Within a few years, if present trends persist, every city and village in North America may have its medical or 
dental hypnotist, every family its practitioners of autohypnotism and mutual suggestion. 
 Why has the history of hypnotism been  so strangely ch eckered? Why is it that, in the words of a great 
psychologist, the late William McDougall, "in spite of the frequent occurrence of  states identical with or closely 
allied to hypnosis, some three centuries of enthusiastic investigation and of bitter controversy were required to 
establish the hypnotic state am ong the facts accepted by the world of Eur opean science"? The answer, as I have 
already suggested, is that most of us believe only what our inte rests, our passions and our metaphysical prejudices 
permit us to believe. "As Hobbes has well observed, if it were for the profit of a governing body that the three 
angles of a triangle should not be equal to two right angles, the doctrin e that they were would, by that body, 
inevitably be denounced as false and pe rnicious. The most curious examples of  this truth have been found in the 
history of medicine. This, on the one ha nd, is nothing more than a history of variations and, on the other, a still 
more wonderful history of how every successive variation has, by medical bodi es, been first furiously denounced 
and then bigotedly adopted." So wrote an older c ontemporary of the persecuted mesmerists, the Scottish 
philosopher and essayist, Sir William Hamilton (who, like ever y intelligent man of the period outside the medical 
profession, took a lively interest in th e phenomena of hypnotism). It should be added that the "profit" of a 
professional body is not to be measured exclusively in te rms of money and power, or ev en of prestige. There are 
vested interests not only in the fields of economics and so cial position, but also in th e field of pure ideas. That a 
beautiful and genuinely antique theory should be ruined by some new, coar se, essentially vulgar fact of mere 
observation seems quite intolerable to  a mind brought up in a proper reverenc e for words and consecrated notions. 
And it goes without saying that, if the threat to a beloved theory should at the same time be a threat to personal 
reputation, this resentment will be rais ed to the pitch of outraged disapprova l and a burning, righteous indignation. 
This was clearly recognized by one of the early historians of science, John Playfair, who noted that new ideas, new 
observations and new methods "must ofte n change the relative pl ace of men engaged in sc ientific pursuits, and 
must oblige many, after descending from th e stations they formerly occupied, to take a lower place in the scale of 
intellectual improvement. The enmity of such men, if they be not animated by a spirit of real candor and the love of 
truth, is likely to be dir ected against the methods, observations and id eas by which their vanity is mortified and 
their importance lessened." 
 If the Early Victorian doctors hated mesmerism, it was because it threatened their vested interests in such 
time-hallowed therapeutic methods as blood-letting and pill-pr escribing, and at the same time their vested interests 
in a time-hallowed philosophy of man and the universe,  which had no place in it for the odder phenomena of 
human psychology. Moreover, they felt th at they could not give up these methods or modify this philosophy 
without gravely injuring their profe ssional dignity. "If mesmerism be true,"  wrote Esdaile, "the  doctors, old and 
young, will have to go to school again; and this is what constitutes the bitterne ss of the mesmeric pill." (Substitute

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

164
"parapsychology" for "mesmerism" and "para-psychological" for "mesmeric" -- and you ha ve here an explanation 
of the refusal, on the part of some c ontemporary scientists, to consider the vast accumulations of evidence in favor 
of the reality of ESP.) 
 The extreme bitterness of the pill accounts for the ex treme violence of the medical diatribes against the new 
observations and the new methods of treat ment, along with all those who had had anything to do with them. It is a 
violence comparable to that which, all too frequentl y, has characterized the controversies of clergymen. The 
doctors loathed the mesmerists with a full-blown odium theologicum, a theological hatred. In his volume of 1855, 
William Neilson quotes many examples of this truly relig ious intemperance of language. Disdaining argument and 
paying no attention to facts, the anti-mesmeric contributors to the Lancet and the Medical Times confined 
themselves exclusively to abuse. "While pursuing their frauds among lunatics and fools, mesmerists give us neither 
umbrage nor disquiet; but within the wa lls of our colleges (there were mesmerists of the highest scientific 
eminence at the Universities of Edinburgh and London) they are scandalous nuisa nces and an insufferable 
disgrace." Elliotson and his followers practice "a harlotry wh ich they call science." Wors e still, they refuse to bow 
to the authority of those licensed repositories of ultimate tr uth, the doctors. Instead, they make their appeal to mere 
reason and uncensored experience, with the shocking result that they have found enthusiastic supporters in every 
class of society -- "the pert folly of the nobility, the w eakest among the literary people, high and low ladies, quack 
clergymen (among whom, it may be remarked, were several bishops and even an archbi shop), itinerant lecturers 
and exhibiting buffoons." To sum up, mesmerism is merely a compound of "quackery, obscenity and imposture, 
and its advocates are at the best deluded idiots, at the worst swindling knaves." 
 In one of its aspects, as we have seen, the history of medicine is the hi story of variations -- the history of 
fads pursued and then rejected, of fashions adopted with  enthusiasm and then quietly dropped in favor of some 
more modish style of diagnosis or of treatment. When all these fads and fa shions are strictly physiological, the 
change from one to another can be made without difficulty  and without any feeling of mental distress. But where 
non-physiological factors are involved -- factors which cannot be explained in  terms of the prevailing medical 
philosophy -- changes of fashion are painful and the resistan ce to change is stubborn a nd often violent. Hypnotism 
involves non-physiological factors; cons equently the reality of hypnosis and the value of hypnotic treatment were 
vehemently denied by the official spokesmen of the medical profession. That the ban upon hypnotism ever came to 
be lifted was due to a variety of causes. First of all, the metaphysical susceptibilities of the doctors were soothed by 
the work of Professor Heidenhain. This  German researcher was able to convince himself and his colleagues that 
hypnosis was always the result of strictly physiological causes . It didn't happen to be true ; but, to use the religious 
phraseology which seems appropriate to the case, it was highly edifying, it brought comfort to the troubled spirit of 
the doctors, and it helped, incidentally, to make hypnotis m respectable. Meanwhile intensive research into the 
nature of mental illness was being carried on, especially in France and Ge rmany, and the idea of subconscious 
mental activity gradually forced itself upon even the mo st physiologically minded psychiatrists. Within the 
enlarged framework of medical philosophy, hypnosis, though s till unexplained, began to ma ke a little more sense. 
But then -- fortunately in some ways, unfortunately in ot hers -- the great Doctor Freud made his appearance. Freud 
banned hypnotism from his system of psychotherapy and, as  an entirely illogical consequence of this ban, 
hypnotism came to be largely neglected in surgery and genera l medicine, where it is of such inestimable value as a 
nonpoisonous anesthetic, as a raiser of resistance to infection, as an improver of morale, as a promoter of healing 
and an accelerator of convalescence.  
 Wars tend to stimulate medical advance, at any ra te in those countries which have escaped severe 
devastation. The current revival of in terest in hypnotism is in part due to its successful employment in military 
hospitals. Medicine has now returned to the position once occupied by Esdaile and Elliotson. That it should have 
taken four generations to reconquer that position is certainly unfortunate. But better late than never. 
(From Esquire Magazine) 
 
 
The Oddest Science 
 
 The reading of yet another book about modern ps ychological theories is always, I find, a rather 
exasperating experience. Clothed in an ugly and hard ly comprehensible jargon, the obvious is portentously

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

165
enunciated, as though it were some kind of esoteric mystery. The immemorially ancient is presented, with fanfares, 
as a brand-new, epoch-making discovery. Instead of open-mindedness, we find dogmatism; instead of 
comprehensive views, we are given theories which ignore whole provinces of given reality, whole categories of the 
most significant kinds of facts. And in stead of the concreteness so essential in a science of observation, instead of 
the principle of multiple causation whic h must govern all thinking about so complex a creature as man, we are 
treated to shameless displays of t hose gravest of intellectual sins, overabstraction, overgeneralization and 
oversimplification. 
 All this does not mean, of course, that treatises a bout modern psychological theories should not be read. 
These treatises are conspicuous facts in the life of our time and, as  such, they must not be ignored. Besides, it goes 
without saying that, in spite of all th eir defects, the formulators of modern  psychological theories have made 
substantial contributions to the sum of practical wisdom and have done something to deepen our understanding of 
human nature. 
 As a history of modern psychology in terms of "an integrative evalua tion of Freud, Adler, Jung and Rank," 
Doctor Ira Progoff's recent book, The Death and Rebirth of Psychology, is clear and illuminating. So clear, indeed, 
and so illuminating that not only the virtues of modern psychology's founding fa thers, but also their shortcomings 
stand out, in its pages, with glaring distinctness. 
 Let us begin with what is, I suppose, the most serious , as it is certainly the most conspicuous, shortcoming 
of them all -- the absence from all th ese theories (with the partial exception of Adler's) of any mention of the body 
as a conditioning factor in the formati on of a personality, or as a determinan t of thoughts, feelings and behavior. 
Adler, it is true, made a number of penetrating remarks on the consequences of a sense of organic inferiority; but 
even Adler was very far from giving th e body its due as a shaper of indivi dual character and destiny. Freud, Jung 
and Rank seem to have imagined that they could unders tand human minds without taki ng into account the bodies 
with which those minds are indissolubly associated. Thei r one-sidedness is the mirror-image of the one-sidedness 
of the exclusively physiological physicia n. But just as it is pe rfectly clear that  bodies cannot be understood or 
successfully treated without reference to their minds, so too it is pe rfectly clear that minds cannot be understood or 
successfully treated without re ference to their bodies. Doctor s are at last reconciling th emselves to the idea of 
psychosomatic medicine. It is time for psychologists to reconc ile themselves to the complementary notion of a 
somato-psychic approach to the problems of mind and character. 
 It was not only by psychology's fo unding fathers that the body was neglected. The same absurd one-
sidedness was and still is observable in most of their successors. How rarely, in recent books on psychology, do we 
come upon a passage like the following from  Doctor Erich Fro mm's work on dreams, The Forgotten Language. 
Commenting on the words of an ancient Hindu writer, Dr. Fromm remarks that "h e points to a significant 
connection between temperament (i.e., those psychic qualities which are rooted in a constitutionally given somatic 
basis) and dream content" -- a connection "which has found hardly  any attention in contemporary dream 
interpretation, although it is a significant factor in dream interpretation, as further research will undoubtedly show." 
After which Dr. Fromm passes on to other, one-sidedly psyc hological considerations. Let us hope that this passing 
reference to the significance of temperament may serve as an opening wedge to a new somato-psychic approach, 
not merely to dreaming, but to all mental activities. It will not be difficult to make such an approach; for all the 
really hard preparatory work has already been done  by Doctor William Sheldon and his colleagues. Using 
Sheldon's rigorous and powerful methods, it is now possible for any psycholog ist or psychiatrist to make an 
accurate assessment of the "constitutionally given somatic ba sis," in which our "psychic qualities" are rooted. But 
though the means are available, they are hardly ever us ed, and psychologists conti nue to treat minds without 
reference to bodies, and to publish what  they are pleased to ca ll "case histories" without  deigning to give the 
slightest indication of what sort of people, somatically speaking, their patients were. How much did Mrs. X weigh -
- ninety pounds or two hundred ? Did Mr. Y have the physique of an ox or  a daddy longlegs, of a panther or a 
jellyfish? To these questions most psychologists never vouchsafe an answer -- presumably because, unlike the rest 
of mankind, they have never thought of  asking them. In his monumental Atlas of Men, Dr. Sheldon has published 
several thousands of photographs s howing the continuous variation of ma sculine physique, and assessing those 
variations within a frame of refe rence having three coordinates, endomorphy, mesomorphy and ectomorphy. 
Turning over the pages of this book, one sees at a glance that it is obviously impossible for creatures so unlike one 
another as men at the extreme limits of  possible variation to feel, think a nd behave in the same way. This is

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

166
something which every one of normal intelligence has known  for the last two or thre e hundred thousand years. It 
has remained for modern psychologists to ignore this self-evident fact and to talk, in thei r vague, rhetorical way, 
about "Man," "Modern Man," or even "Man in the Era of Sexuality," as though there were standardized objects 
corresponding to these words. But in fact, of course, nobody has ever encountered these mythical beings. Nobody 
has ever encountered anyone but Tom, Dick and Harry, Dolly, Molly and Polly. But, as everybody knows perfectly 
well, Tom is congenitally unlike Dick, and Harry is constitutionally different from both of the others. And the same 
is true of Dolly, Molly and Polly. They are profoundly diffe rent one from another, a nd many of their differences 
are built in, or (as Dr. Fromm would say), "rooted in a constitutionally given somatic basis." Why, one wonders, do 
the men and women whose profession it is to understa nd and treat people's minds neglect to study these 
constitutionally determined differen ces between individuals? Su ch voluntary ignorance can  be accounted for, I 
suppose, partly by the force of inertia and ingrained habi t; the one-sided approach is traditional, time-hallowed, 
sanctioned by the bad example of the founding fathers. Nor must  we forget that it is a great deal easier to be one-
sided than to think and act realistic ally in terms of multiple causation. Wh erever the line of least resistance can be 
followed, it generally is followed. 
 We see, then, that in their theo ries, as in their practice, the foundi ng fathers completely neglected the 
"constitutionally given somatic basis," which determines so much of our thinking, feeling and behavior. However, 
they did not neglect heredity altogether. Jung and, ab ove all, Rank lightheartedl y maintained that acquired 
characteristics are inherited -- a doctri ne which all geneticists, even (since the fall of Lysenko) in Russia, now 
repudiate. It was assumed in their theo rizing that notions popular  in earlier periods of history are somehow built 
into the hereditary make-up of twentie th-century babies. According to Rank, "t he meeting of the points of view of 
these two eras (the Spiritual Era and the Sexual Era) and the resulting tension that remained in man ever afterwards 
[italics mine] comprise the main source of those inner conflicts that a later age described as 'psychological.' " This, 
surely, is pure balderdash. Hardly less nonsensical is Jung' s equation of a human culture -pattern with the built-in 
behavior of an insect. For the East Af rican tribe of the Elgonyi, he writes, their morning r itual "is a part of the 
pattern of behavior that lif e requires, just as the leaf -cutting ant cannot do otherwise than live out the pattern 
inherent in the nature of its species." But in fact the behavior-pattern built into the cells of the leaf-cutting ant is of 
a radically different kind from the behavior-pattern acquired, during infancy and childhood, by an East African 
tribesman. Take a batch of ant's eggs from the tropics and hatch them out in  a greenhouse in St ockholm; the adult 
leaf-cutters will behave precisely as adult leaf-cutters behave in Africa. But now take a new-born Elgonyi baby and 
bring him up in Stockholm. By the time he grows up, he will be thinking, feeling, spea king and behaving like any 
Swede of his particular physique and temperament. The mo rning ritual performed by the Elgonyi in Africa is no 
more built into them than are thei r table manners or their language. And now consider the following statement. 
"When Jung refers to Christ as a 'symbol  of the Self,' he means to indicate the fact [italics mine] that for the 
western psyche some variation of the image of Jesus Christ is inevitably [italics mine] the center, around which the 
symbolism of individuation is expressed." But it is an observable fact that many people born and brought up in the 
West (and so, presumably, possessed of a "western psyche ") do not experience the image of Christ as a central 
symbol. Its presence or absence depends on the nature of the conditioning to which the individual happens to have 
been subjected. 
 It is not only through their inherited make-up that bodi es affect thoughts, feelings and behavior. Our moods, 
our general mental tone, our metaphysical theories and vi ew of life, may be determin ed by faulty nutrition or a 
chronic infection. There is ample evid ence that many undesirable mental states have their primary source, not in 
some traumatic event of childhood or the more recent past, but in what the late  F. M. Alexander aptly called "the 
improper use of the self" -- in bad postural habits, resulting in impair ed physiological and psychological 
functioning. If you teach an individual first to be aware of  his physical organism and then to use it as it was meant 
to be used, you can often change  his entire attitude to life and cure his neurotic tendenci es. But this, of course, is 
something which no one-sided psychologist  has been taught to do, or would approve of doing, even if he knew 
how. He just goes on with free association and dream anal ysis, and hopes for the best. And the best (as those who 
have tried to assess the effectivene ss of psychoanalysis assure us) does not happen as of ten as one might hope or, 
given the exorbitant cost of the treatment, legitimately expect. 
 And here let us ask ourselves a question which is obviousl y of the highest importa nce. Why is it that, 
though practically every child has to e ndure large numbers of traumatic expe riences, only some children grow up

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

167
to be neurotics? This is a question to which neither the founding fathers, nor their successors, have paid the 
attention it deserves. Clearly, we are concerned here with  one aspect of the more ge neral problem of resistance. 
Why are some people so resistant to almost every kind of illness, while others go down like ninepins? There are 
doubtless many reasons for differences in individual resistance, some strictly environmental, others (more difficult, 
but perhaps not impossible, to control) built in and heredi tary. Thus, extreme susceptibility to the common cold is 
probably due to a mutant gene. When the biochemical  consequences of this mutation can be offset by 
pharmacological means, the problem of the common cold will be solved. (After which, no doubt, we shall have 
another, as yet unsuspected, problem to take its place!) And what of ex treme susceptibility of psychological 
traumas? Perhaps this too is geneti c in origin. The number of psychotics in relation to the total population has 
remained, it would seem, remarkably constant. Presumably su sceptibility to these severe mental illnesses is due to 
inherited metabolic anomalies, which result in enzyme di sbalance and a special kind of  self-poisoning. That some 
genetic factor may be responsible, at l east in part, for susceptibili ty to the milder forms of mental illness seems 
perfectly possible. If this is the case, we may look forward to a ti me when the pharmacologists will achieve rapidly 
and certainly the results which present- day psychiatrists, with their one-sided  methods, can achieve, if at all, only 
after years of analysis. 
 Dr. Progoff says of Freud that his psychological theories were too materi alistic. My own view is that, like 
the theories of most ot her modern psychologists, they are not nearly materialistic e nough. It is worthy of note that 
the most "spiritual" religions have been the ones to pay the closest, most scientific attention to the body. Hindu and 
Buddhist theology has a well-developed theory of inherited temperaments. According to this theory, a man is born 
to follow either the path of devotion, or the path of active duty, or the path of contemplation. And this is not all. If 
he is born with the capacity to unite himself with God th rough contemplation, he will be well advised to facilitate 
the contemplative process by paying sp ecial attention to his bodily posture  and to such bodily functions as 
breathing, eating and excreting. Every Orie ntal philosophy is at bottom a treatise on transcendental psychotherapy. 
The aim of this therapy is to cure the (statistically speak ing) normal of their complacent belief that they are sane, 
and to lead them on to a state of what may be called absolu te, rather than statistical, normality -- a state in which 
they realize who, at bottom, they are. There can be no sp irituality except on a basis of well-informed materialism. 
Lacking completely such a basis, psychology as we know  it at present is doomed to go on being theoretically 
unrealistic and, in practice, largely ineffective. 
 Hardly less amazing than the founding fathers' neglect of the body is their failure to pay any attention to 
language as a determinant of thought, feeling and behavior. We are human b ecause we talk, and the universe in 
which we live is largely a homemade affair, carved out of the given world by our vo cabulary and our syntax, and 
re-created by ourselves so as to conform in its structure to the structure of the language in which we happen to have 
been brought up. All the founding fathers, and especially Ju ng, were deeply interested in what Dr. Fromm calls 
"the forgotten language" of dreams, myths and fairy tales. But incomparably more important to every human being 
than this forgotten language is the well-remembered dial ect in which he talks to ot her human beings, the native 
language -- English, Chinese, Eskimo -- in terms of which he does most of his learning, almost all his thinking and 
even much of his feeling and perceiving. (Our perceiving is hardly ever of even ts as they are immediately given; it 
is rather of our own ready-made, verb alized concepts projected by the percei ver into the outsid e world and super-
imposed, so to speak, upon the objects of our immediate experience.) Our dependence on language is such that, for 
most of us, words no longer stand for things -- rather th ings stand for words, and objects are treated as so many 
illustrations of our verbalized abstractions. No language is completely true to the inner and outer world, to which it 
is supposed to refer. Most languages, indeed, are so untr ue to given reality that it has become necessary to 
supplement them with the special lan guages of mathematics. Thus, the worl d is unquestionably a continuum; there 
are in reality no separate substantial things, there are onl y merging events and interacting processes in space-time. 
But our languages (at any rate those of the Indo-European stock) do not permit us to speak about the world as a 
continuum, and whenever we want to discuss this  aspect of reality, we must use such special, ad hoc languages as 
the calculus. Our linguistic troubles would be grave enough, even if we always used our language correctly, 
according to the rules of logic and th e dictates of common sense. But in many circumstances of life, we use 
language incorrectly and with a total disregard for the rules. The result is unreali stic thinking, debauched feeling 
and distorted perception, leading to ac tion of every degree of inappropriatene ss from the merely eccentric to the 
diabolic, from harmless Micawberism to such collective in sanities as Hitlerism, heresy hunting and religious wars.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

168
Consistently bad language, as Korzybski and the Semanticists have pointed out, is a prime cause of delinquency in 
thinking, feeling and behaving. But most modern psychologists, as we have seen, are more interested in squabbling 
about the interpretation of th e coded rigmarole of dreams than in studyi ng the far more important subject of the 
language nobody ever forgets, and the wa ys in which, during our waking hours, we talk ourselves and one another 
out of all contact with cosmic reality and the elementary conventions of human decency. 
 And now let us briefly consider a few more of the shortcomings of the founding fathers. As Dr. Progoff has 
pointed out, all of them indulged in the intellectual si n of working up their private experiences into universal 
generalizations. Thus Freud, for psychol ogical reasons of his own, extolled th e extroverted life as "the way of 
health for every man." This conclusion is wholly unw arranted; for it is quite obvious that many people are 
congenially introverted and that, for them, the extroverted life is the way of mi sery, neurosis and disease. And here 
is another curious example of the same kind of intellectual delinque ncy. Otto Rank broke with Freud by 
performing what was for him a great cr eative act -- the writing of his book, The Trauma of Birth. Freud had been 
very kind to Rank, and, after the break, the latter felt severe  pangs of remorse. Universalizing his private feelings, 
he proceeded to "make the acute observ ation that one of the aftermaths of a creative act is an attack of guilt 
feelings, remorse and anxiety." The only trouble with this "acu te observation" is that it happens to be untrue to all 
the facts, except those of Rank's private experience in a very special situation. When Rank asserted that all creative 
acts are followed by guilt feelings, he was not making an acu te observation; he was merely indulging in bad logic, 
egotism and voluntary ignorance. I have known many artists, and I have observed that their creative acts were 
sometimes followed by boredom and a sense of emptiness, due to the fact that they had finished their task and had 
nothing further, for the moment, to do. Occasionally, too, some of them would experience a feeling of disgust at 
the thought that they had put forth their best efforts and exposed their very soul s for the amusement of an 
indifferent, uncomprehending and profoundly frivolous public. The artists of my  acquaintance never suffered from 
guilt feelings after an act of creation -- for the good reason that none was in the peculiar position, while creating, of 
having quarreled with a benef actor. Building up grandiose generalizations from a few cases, or even from a single 
case -- this, among the psychologists, has been standard procedure. 
 No less characteristic, and no less  deplorably unscientific, has been  their tendency to dogmatize. The 
founding fathers quarreled with one anothe r; for each was convinced of his own absolute rightness. Thus, in the 
matter of dream interpretati ons, "Freud," to quote the words of Dr. Fr omm, "rigidly refused to accept any 
modification and insisted that the only possible interpretation of a dream was that of the wish-fulfillment theory. . . 
Jung. . . equally dogmatically tended to  interpret the dream as an expressi on of the wisdom of the unconscious." 
Some of the old odium theologicum (the theological hatred, the loathing on pr inciple) tends to survive among their 
followers, and we are treated to the ludicrous spectacle -- ludicrous, that is to say, in a field which is supposed to be 
scientific -- of Freudianity pitted against Jungism, orthodoxy against ort hodoxy, and both against the eclectic 
Modernism which is gradually taking thei r place. Perhaps the most ludicrous fa ct of all is that forty years of 
sectarian squabbling might have been avoided, if the combatants had ta ken the trouble to study a book, which 
appeared at the dawn of the "Psychologi cal Era." I refer to F. W. H. Myers' Human Personality, first published in 
1903. Myers set forth a theory of the unconscious far mo re comprehensive than Freud's narrow and one-sided 
hypothesis, and superior to Jung's in be ing better documented with concrete facts and less encumbered with those 
psycho-anthropologico-pseudo-genetic speculations which becl oud the writings of the Sage of Zurich. Jung is like 
those German classical scholars, of wh om Person once said that "they dive deeper and come up muddier than any 
others." Myers has the immense merit of  diving as deeply as Jung into th at impersonal, spir itual world which 
transcends and interpenetrates our bodies, our conscious minds and our pe rsonal unconscious -- of diving as 
deeply, but of coming up again with the minimum of mud on him. One of  the oddest facts about the oddest of the 
sciences, is that this amazingly ri ch, wide-ranging and profound book should ha ve been neglected in favor of 
description of psychological reality much less complete  and realistic, and of explanatory theories much less 
adequate to the given facts. 
(From Esquire Magazine)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

169
RX FOR SENSE AND PSYCHE 
 
 
 
The Doors of Perception 
 
 It was in 1886 that the German pharmacologist, Ludw ig Lewin, published the first systematic study of the 
cactus, to which his own name was subsequently given. Anhalonium Lewinii was new to science. To primitive 
religion and the Indians of Mexico and the American S outhwest it was a friend of im memorially long standing. 
Indeed, it was much more than a friend. In the words of one of the early Span ish visitors to the New World, "they 
eat a root which they call peyote, and which they venerate as though it were a deity." 
 Why they should have venerated it as a deity became apparent when such eminent psychologists as 
Jaensch, Havelock Ellis and Weir Mitc hell began their experiments with mes calin, the active principle of peyote. 
True, they stopped short at a point well this side of idol atry; but all concurred in as signing to mescalin a position 
among drugs of unique distincti on. Administered in suitable doses, it ch anges the quality of consciousness more 
profoundly and yet is less toxic than any other substance in the pharmacologist's repertory. 
 Mescalin research has been going  on sporadically ever since the da ys of Lewin and Havelock Ellis. 
Chemists have not merely isolated the alkaloid; they have learned how to synthesize it, so that the supply no longer 
depends on the sparse and intermittent cr op of a desert cactus. Alienists have dosed themselves with mescalin in 
the hope thereby of coming to  a better, a first-hand, understanding of th eir patients' mental processes. Working 
unfortunately upon too few subjects with in too narrow a range of circumstan ces, psychologists have observed and 
catalogued some of the drug's more striking effects. Ne urologists and physiologists have found out something 
about the mechanism of its action upon the central nervous system. And at least one professional philosopher has 
taken mescalin for the light it may throw on such ancient, unsolved riddles as the place of mind in nature and the 
relationship between brain and consciousness. 
 There matters rested until, two or three years ago, a new and perhaps highly signifi cant fact was observed. 
Actually the fact had been staring everyone in the face for several decades; but nobody, as it happened, had noticed 
it until a young English psychiatrist, at pr esent working in Canada, was struck by the close similarity, in chemical 
composition, between mescalin and adrenalin. Further resear ch revealed that lysergic  acid, an extremely potent 
hallucinogen derived from ergot, has a stru ctural biochemical relationship to th e others. Then came the discovery 
that adrenochrome, which is a prod uct of the decomposition of adrenali n, can produce many of the symptoms 
observed in mescalin intoxication. Bu t adrenochrome probably o ccurs spontaneously in the human body. In other 
words, each one of us may be capable  of manufacturing a chemical, minut e doses of which are known to cause 
profound changes in consciousness. Certain of these chan ges are similar to those which occur in that most 
characteristic plague of the twentieth  century, schizophrenia. Is the mental disorder due to a chemical disorder? 
And is the chemical disorder due, in its turn, to psychologi cal distresses affecting the adrenals? It would be rash 
and premature to affirm it. The most we can say is that some kind of a prima facie case has been made out. 
Meanwhile the clue is being systematically followed, the sl euths -- biochemists, psychi atrists, psychologists -- are 
on the trail. 
 By a series of, for me, extremel y fortunate circumstances I found myse lf, in the spring of 1953, squarely 
athwart that trail. One of the sleuth s had come on business to California. In  spite of seventy years of mescalin 
research, the psychological material at his disposal was still absurdly inad equate, and he was anxious to add to it. I 
was on the spot and willing, indeed eager , to be a guinea pig. Thus it came a bout that, one bright May morning, I 
swallowed four-tenths of a gram of mescalin dissolved in half a glass of water and sat down to wait for the results. . 
. 
 Half an hour after swallowing the drug I became aware of a slow dance of golden lights. A little later there 
were sumptuous red surfaces swelling and expanding from bright nodes of energy that vibrated with a continuously 
changing, patterned life. At another time the closing of my eyes revealed a complex of gray structures, within 
which pale bluish spheres kept emerging into intens e solidity and, having emerged, would slide noiselessly 
upwards, out of sight. But at no time were there faces or forms of men or animals. I saw no landscapes, no 
enormous spaces, no magical growth and metamorphosis of buildings, nothing remotely like a drama or a parable.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

170
The other world to which mescalin admitted me was not the world of visions; it existed out there, in what I could 
see with my eyes open. The great change was in the r ealm of objective fact. What ha d happened to my subjective 
universe was relatively unimportant. 
 I took my pill at eleven. An hour and a half later, I was sitting in my study, looking intently at a small glass 
vase. The vase contained only three flow ers -- a full-blown Belle of Portugal ro se, shell pink with a hint at every 
petal's base of a hotter, flamier hue; a large magenta and cream-colored carnation; and, pale purple at the end of its 
broken stalk, the bold heraldic blossom of an iris. Fortuitous and provisional,  the little nosegay broke all the rules 
of traditional good taste. At breakfast that morning I had been struck by the lively dissonance of its colors. But that 
was no longer the point. I was not looki ng now at an unusual flower arrangement. I was seeing what Adam had 
seen on the morning of his creation -- the miracle, moment by moment, of naked existence. 
 "Is it agreeable?" somebody asked. (During this part of  the experiment, all conversations were recorded on 
a dictating machine, and it has been possible for me to refresh my memory of what was said.) 
 "Neither agreeable nor disagr eeable," I answered. "It just is." 
 Istigkeit-- wasn't that the word Meister Eckhart liked to  use? "Is-ness." The Being of Platonic philosophy -- 
except that Plato seems to have made the enormous, the grotesque mistake of separating Being from becoming and 
identifying it with the mathematical abstraction of the Idea. He could neve r, poor fellow, have seen a bunch of 
flowers shining with their own inner light and all but qui vering under the pressure of the significance with which 
they were charged; could never have perceived that what  rose and iris and carnation  so intensely signified was 
nothing more, and nothing less, than what they were -- a transience that was ye t eternal life, a perpetual perishing 
that was at the same time pure Bein g, a bundle of minute, unique particular s in which, by some unspeakable and 
yet self-evident paradox, was to be seen the divine source of all existence. 
 I continued to look at the flowers, and in their living light I seemed to detect the qualitative equivalent of 
breathing -- but of a breathing without re turns to a starting point, with no r ecurrent ebbs but only a repeated flow 
from beauty to heightened beauty, from deeper to ever  deeper meaning. Words like "g race" and "transfiguration" 
came to my mind, and this, of course, was what, among othe r things, they stood for. My eyes traveled from the 
rose to the carnation, and from that feathery incandescen ce to the smooth scrolls of sentient amethyst which were 
the iris. The Beatific Vision, Sat Chit Ananda, Being-Awareness-Bliss -- for the first time I understood, not on the 
verbal level, not by inch oate hints or at a distance, but precisely and completely what those prodigious syllables 
referred to. And then I remembered a passage I had read in one of Suzuki's essays. "What is the Dharma-Body of 
the Buddha?" ("The Dharma-Body of the Buddha" is an other way of saying Mind, Suchness, the Void, the 
Godhead.) The question is asked in a Zen monastery by an  earnest and bewildered novice. And with the prompt 
irrelevance of one of the Marx Brothers, the Master answers, "The hedge at the bottom of the garden." "And the 
man who realizes this truth,"  the novice dubiously inquires,  "what, may I ask, is he?"  Groucho gives him a whack 
over the shoulders with his staff and answers, "A golden-haired lion." 
 It had been, when I read it, only a vaguely pregna nt piece of nonsense. Now it wa s all as clear as day, as 
evident as Euclid. Of course the Dh arma-Body of the Buddha was the hedge at  the bottom of the garden. At the 
same time, and no less obviously, it was these flowers, it was a nything that I -- or rather the blessed Not-I, released 
for a moment from my throttling embr ace -- cared to look at. The books, for ex ample, with which my study walls 
were lined. Like the flowers,  they glowed, when I looked at them, with  brighter colors, a profounder significance. 
Red books, like rubies; emerald books; books bound in white jade; books of agate; of aquamarine, of yellow topaz; 
lapis lazuli books whose color was so intense, so intrinsica lly meaningful, that they s eemed to be on the point of 
leaving the shelves to thrust themselves more insistently on my attention. 
 "What about spatial relationships?" the inves tigator inquired, as I was looking at the books. 
 It was difficult to answer. True, the perspective looked rather odd, a nd the walls of the room no longer 
seemed to meet in right angles. But these were not the real ly important facts. The really important facts were that 
spatial relationships had ceased to matte r very much and that my mind was perc eiving the world in terms of other 
than spatial categories. At ordinary times the eye concerns itself with such problems as Where? -- How far? -- How 
situated in relation to what? In the mescalin experience the implied qu estions to which the eye responds are of 
another order. Place and distance cease to be of much interest. The mind does its perceiving in terms of intensity of 
existence, profundity of significance, relationships within a pattern. I saw the books, but was not at all concerned 
with their positions in space. What I noticed, what impres sed itself upon my mind was the fact that all of them

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

171
glowed with living light and that in some the glory was mo re manifest than in others. In this context position and 
the three dimensions were beside the poi nt. Not, of course, that the category of space had been abolished. When I 
got up and walked about, I could do so quite normall y, without misjudging the wherea bouts of objects. Space was 
still there; but it had lost its pre dominance. The mind was primarily concer ned, not with measures and locations, 
but with being and meaning. 
 And along with indifference to space there went an even more complete indifference to time. 
 "There seems to be plenty of it," was all I would answ er, when the investigator asked me to say what I felt 
about time. 
 Plenty of it, but exactly how much was entirely irrelevant. I could, of course, have  looked at my watch; but 
my watch, I knew, was in another universe. My actual experi ence had been, was still, of  an indefinite duration or 
alternatively of a perpetual present made up of one continually changing apocalypse. 
 From the books the investigator directed my atten tion to the furniture. A sma ll typing table stood in the 
center of the room; beyond it, from my point of view, was a wicker chair and beyond th at a desk. The three pieces 
formed an intricate pattern of horizont als, uprights and diagonals -- a pattern all the more interesting for not being 
interpreted in terms of spatial relationships. Table, ch air and desk came together in  a composition that was like 
something by Braque or Juan Gris, a still life recogni zably related to the objectiv e world, but rendered without 
depth, without any attempt at photographic realism. I was lo oking at my furniture, not as  the utilitarian who has to 
sit on chairs, to write at desks and tabl es, and not as the cameraman or scient ific recorder, but as the pure aesthete 
whose concern is only with forms and th eir relationships within th e field of vision or the picture space. But as I 
looked, this purely aesthetic, Cubist's-eye view gave place to what I can only de scribe as the sacramental vision of 
reality. I was back where I had been wh en I was looking at the flowers -- b ack in a world where everything shone 
with the Inner Light, and was infinite in its significance. The legs, for example, of that chair -- how miraculous 
their tubularity, how supernatural their polished smoothness! I spent several mi nutes -- or was it several centuries? 
-- not merely gazing at those bamboo legs, but actually being them -- or rather being myself in them; or, to be still 
more accurate (for "I" was not involved in the case, nor in a certain sense we re "they") being my Not-self in the 
Not-self which was the chair. 
 Reflecting on my experience, I find myself agreeing with the eminent Cambridge  philosopher, Dr. C. D. 
Broad, "that we should do well to consider much more seriously than we ha ve hitherto been inclined to do the type 
of theory which Bergson put forward in connection with memory and sense perception. The suggestion is that the 
function of the brain and nervous system and sense organs is in the main eliminative and not productive. Each 
person is at each moment capable of remembering all that has ever happened to him and of perceiving everything 
that is happening everywhere in the universe. The function of the brain and nervous system is to protect us from 
being overwhelmed and confused by this mass of largely useless and irrelevant knowledge, by shutting out most of 
what we should otherwise perceive or remember at any moment, and leaving only th at very small and special 
selection which is likely to be practically useful." According to such a theory, each one of us is potentially Mind at 
Large. But in so far as we are animals, our business is at all costs to survive. To make biological survival possible, 
Mind at Large has to be funneled through the reducing valv e of the brain and nervous system. What comes out at 
the other end is a measly trickle of the kind of consciousness which will help us  to stay alive on the surface of this 
particular planet. . . 
 The effects of mescalin are the sort of effects you could expect to follow the administration of a drug 
having the power to impair the efficien cy of the cerebral reducing valve. When  the brain runs out of sugar, the 
undernourished ego grows weak, can't be bothered to undertake the necessary chores, and loses all interest in those 
spatial and temporal relationships which mean so much to  an organism bent on getting on in the world. As Mind at 
Large seeps past the no longer waterti ght valve, all kinds of bi ologically useless things start to happen. In some 
cases there may be extra-sensory percep tions. Other persons discover a world of  visionary beauty. To others again 
is revealed the glory, the infinite value and meaningfulness of naked exis tence, of the give n, unconceptualized 
event. . . 
 "This is how one ought to see," I kept saying as I l ooked down at my trousers, or glanced at the jeweled 
books in the shelves, at the legs of my infinitely more than Van-Goghian chair. "This is how one ought to see, how 
things really are." And yet there were reservations. For if one always saw like this, one would never want to do 
anything else. Just looking, just being th e divine Not-self of flower, of book, of  chair, of flannel. That would be

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

172
enough. But in that case what about othe r people? What about human relations? In the recording of that morning's 
conversations I find the question constantly repeated, "What about human relations?" How could one reconcile this 
timeless bliss of seeing as one ought to see with the tem poral duties of doing what one ought to do and feeling as 
one ought to feel? "One ought to be able," I said, "to see these trousers as infinitely important and human beings as 
still more infinitely important." One ought  -- but in practice  it seemed to be impossible.  This participation in the 
manifest glory of things left no room, so to speak, for the ordinary, the necessary c oncerns of human existence, 
above all for concerns involving persons. For persons are selv es and, in one respect at least, I was now a Not-self, 
simultaneously perceiving and being the Not-self of the things around me. To this new-born Not-self, the behavior, 
the appearance, the very thought of the self it had moment arily ceased to be, and of other selves, its one-time 
fellows, seemed not indeed distasteful (for distastefulne ss was not one of the categories in terms of which I was 
thinking), but enormously irrelevant. Compelled by the investigator to analyze and report on what I was doing (and 
how I longed to be left alone with Eternity in a flower, Infi nity in four chair legs and th e Absolute in the folds of a 
pair of flannel trousers!), I realized that I was deliberat ely avoiding the eyes of those who were with me in the 
room, deliberately refraining from bei ng too much aware of them. One was my wife, the other a man I respected 
and greatly liked; but both belonged to the world from which, for the moment, mescalin had delivered me -- the 
world of selves, of time, of moral j udgments and utilitarian considerations, the world (and it wa s this aspect of 
human life which I wished, above all else, to forget) of self-assertion, of cocksureness, of overvalued words and 
idolatrously worshiped notions. 
 At this stage of the proceedings  I was handed a large colored reprodu ction of the well-known self-portrait 
by Cézanne -- the head and shoulders of a man in a larg e straw hat, red-cheeked, red-lipped, with rich black 
whiskers and a dark unfriendly eye. It is a magnificent painting; but it was not  as a painting that I now saw it. For 
the head promptly took on a third dimension and came to life as a small goblin-lik e man looking out through a 
window in the page before me. I started to laugh. And when they asked me why, "What pretensions!" I kept 
repeating. "Who on earth does he think he is?" The question was not addressed to Cézanne in particular, but to the 
human species at large. Who did they all think they were? 
 For relief I turned back to the fo lds in my trousers. "This is how one ought to see," I repeated yet again. 
And I might have added, "These are the sort of things one  ought to look at." Things without pretensions, satisfied 
to be merely themselves, sufficient in their Suchness, not  acting a part, not trying, in sanely, to go it alone, in 
isolation from the Dharma-Body, in Luciferian defiance of the grace of God. 
 "The nearest approach to this ," I said, "would be a Vermeer." 
 Yes, a Vermeer. For that mysterious artist was trebly  gifted -- with the vision that perceives the Dharma-
Body as the hedge at the bottom of the ga rden, with the talent to render as much  of that vision as the limitations of 
human capacity permit, and with the prude nce to confine himself in his painti ngs to the more manageable aspects 
of reality; for though Vermeer represented human beings, he  was always a painter of still life. Cézanne, who told 
his female sitters to do their best to look like apples, tried to pa int portraits in the same spirit. But his pippin-like 
women are more nearly related to Pl ato's Ideas than to the Dharma-Body in the hedge. They are Eternity and 
Infinity seen, not in sand or flower, but in the abstractions of some very superior brand of geometry. Vermeer never 
asked his girls to look like apples. On the contrary, he in sisted on their being girls to the very limit -- but always 
with the proviso that they refrain from behaving girlishl y. They might sit or quietly stand but never giggle, never 
display self-consciousness, never sa y their prayers or pine for absent  sweethearts, never gossip, never gaze 
enviously at other women's babies, never flirt, never love or hate or work. In the act of doing any of these things 
they would doubtless become more intens ely themselves, but would cease, for th at very reason, to manifest their 
divine essential Not-self. In Blake's phrase, the doors of Vermeer's perception were only partially cleansed. A 
single panel had become almost perfectly  transparent; the rest of the door was still m uddy. The essential Not-self 
could be perceived very clearly in th ings and in living creatures on the h ither side of good and evil. In human 
beings it was visible only when they  were in repose, their minds untroubl ed, their bodies moti onless. In these 
circumstances Vermeer could see Suchness in all its heaven ly beauty -- could see and, in some small measure, 
render it in a subtle and sumptuous still life. Vermeer is undoubtedly the greatest painter of human still lives. . . 
 But meanwhile my question remained unanswered. How was this cleansed perception to be reconciled with 
a proper concern with human relations, with the necessary chores and duties, to say nothing of charity and practical 
compassion? The age-old debate between the actives and the contemplatives was being renewed -- renewed, so far

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

173
as I was concerned, with an unprecedented poignancy. For until this morning I had known contemplation only in 
its humbler, its more ordinary forms -- as discursive thinking; as a rapt absorption in poetry or painting or music; as 
a patient waiting upon those inspirations, without whic h even the prosiest writer cannot hope to accomplish 
anything; as occasional glimpses, in Nature, of Wordsw orth's "something far more deeply interfused"; as 
systematic silence leading, sometimes,  to hints of an "obscure knowledge. " But now I knew contemplation at its 
height. At its height, but not yet in its fullness. For in its fullness the way of Mary includes the way of Martha and 
raises it, so to speak, to its own hi gher power. Mescalin opens up the way of  Mary, but shuts the door on that of 
Martha. It gives access to contemplation -- but to a contemplation that is in compatible with action and even with 
the will to action, the very thought of action. In the interval s between his revelations the mescalin taker is apt to 
feel that, though in one way everything is supremely as it should be, in a nother there is something wrong. His 
problem is essentially the same as th at which confronts the quietest, the arhat and, on another level, the landscape 
painter and the painter of human still lives. Mescalin  can never solve that problem; it can only pose it, 
apocalyptically, for those to whom it had never before presented itself. Th e full and final solution can be found 
only by those who are prepared to  implement the right kind of Weltanschauung by means of the right kind of 
behavior and the right kind of consta nt and unstrained alertness. Over against the quietist stands the active-
contemplative, the saint, the man who, in Eckhart's phrase, is ready to come down from the seventh heaven in order 
to bring a cup of water to his sick brother. Over against the arhat, retreating from appearances into an entirely 
transcendental Nirvana, stands the Bodhisattva, for whom Suchness and the world of contingencies are one, and for 
whose boundless compassion every one of those contingencies is an occasion not only for transfiguring insight, but 
also for the most practical charity. And in the universe of art, over against Vermeer and the other painters of human 
still lives, over against the masters of Chinese and Japanese landscape painting, over against Constable and Turner, 
against Sisley and Seurat and Cézanne, stands the all- inclusive art of Rembrandt. These are enormous names, 
inaccessible eminences. For myself, on this memorable May morning, I could only be grateful for an experience 
which had shown me, more clearly than I had ever seen  it before, the true nature of the challenge and the 
completely liberating response. 
(From The Doors of Perception) 
 
 
 
Drugs That Shape Men's Minds 
 
 In the course of history many more people have died for their drink and their dope than have died for their 
religion or their country. The craving for ethyl alcohol and the opiates has been stronger, in these millions, than the 
love of God, of home, of children; ev en of life. Their cry was not for liberty  or death; it was for death preceded by 
enslavement. There is a paradox here, and a mystery. W hy should such multitudes of me n and women be so ready 
to sacrifice themselves for a cause so utterly hopeless and in ways so painful and so profoundly humiliating? 
 To this riddle there is, of course, no simple or  single answer. Human beings  are immensely complicated 
creatures, living simultaneously in a ha lf dozen different worlds. Each indi vidual is unique and, in a number of 
respects, unlike all the other members of the species. None of our motives is unmixed, none of our actions can be 
traced back to a single source and, in any group we care to study, behavior patterns that are observably similar may 
be the result of many constellations of dissimilar causes. 
 Thus, there are some alcoholics who seem to have been biochemically predestined to alcoholism. (Among 
rats, as Prof. Roger Williams, of the University of Te xas, has shown, some are born drunkards; some are born 
teetotalers and will never touch the st uff.) Other alcoholics have been foredoom ed not by some inherited defect in 
their biochemical make-up, but by their ne urotic reactions to distressing events in their childhood or adolescence. 
Again, others embark upon their course of slow suicide as  a result of mere imitati on and good fellowship because 
they have made such an "excellent adjustment to th eir group" -- a process which, if the group happens to be 
criminal, idiotic or merely ignorant, can bring only disaster to the well-adjusted individual. Nor must we forget that 
large class of addicts who have taken to drugs or dri nk in order to escape from phys ical pain. Aspirin, let us 
remember, is a very recent invention.  Until late in the Victorian era, "popp y and mandragora," along with henbane 
and ethyl alcohol, were the only pain relievers available to civilized man. Toothache, arthritis and neuralgia could,

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

174
and frequently did, drive men and women to become opium addicts. 
 De Quincey, for example, first resorted to opium in order to relieve "excrucia ting rheumatic pains of the 
head." He swallowed his poppy and, an hour later, "What a re surrection from the lowest depths of the inner spirit! 
What an apocalypse!" And it was not merely that he felt no more pain. "This negative effect was swallowed up in 
the immensity of those positive effects which had opened up before me, in the abyss of divine enjoyment thus 
suddenly revealed. . . Here was the secret of happiness,  about which the philosophers had disputed for so many 
ages, at once discovered." 
 "Resurrection, apocalypse, di vine enjoyment, happiness. . ." De Quincey's words lead us to the very heart of 
our paradoxical mystery. The problem of drug addiction and excessive drinking is not merely a matter of chemistry 
and psychopathology, of relief from pain and conformity with a bad society. It is also a problem in metaphysics -- a 
problem, one might almost say, in theo logy. In The Varieties of Religious Experience, William James has touched 
on these metaphysical aspects of addiction: 
 
 The sway of alcohol over mankind is unquestionably due to  its power to stimulate the mystical faculties in human 
nature, usually crushed to earth by the cold facts and dry crit icisms of the sober hour. Sobriety diminishes, discriminates and  
says no. Drunkenness expands, unites and says ye s. It is in fact the great exciter of the Yes function in man. It brings its 
votary from the chill periphery of things into the radiant core . It makes him for the moment one with truth. Not through mere 
perversity do men run after it. To the poor and the unlettered it stands in the place of symphony concerts and literature; and it 
is part of the deeper mystery and tragedy of  life that whiffs and gleams of something that we immediately recognize as 
excellent should be vouchsafed to so many  of us only through the fleeting earlier pha ses of what, in its totality, is so 
degrading a poison. The drunken consciousness is one bit of the mystic consciousness, and our total opinion of it must find 
its place in our opinion of that larger whole. 
 
 William James was not the first to detect a likene ss between drunkenness and the mystical and premystical 
states. On the day of Pentecost there were people who explained the strange behavior  of the disciples by saying, 
"These men are full of new wine." 
 Peter soon undeceived them: "These are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the 
day. But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel. And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I 
will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh." 
 And it is not only by "the dry critics of the sober hour " that the state of God-in toxication has been likened 
to drunkenness. In their efforts to e xpress the inexpressible, the great my stics themselves have done the same. 
Thus, St. Theresa of Avila tells us that she "regards the center of our soul as a cellar, into which God admits us as 
and when it pleases Him, so as to intoxicate us with the delicious wine of His grace." 
 Every fully developed religion exists simultaneously on several different levels. It exists as a set of abstract 
concepts about the world and its governance. It exists as a set of rites and sacraments, as a traditional method for 
manipulating the symbols, by means of which beliefs about th e cosmic order are expressed. It exists as the feelings 
of love, fear and devotion evoked by this manipulation of symbols. 
 And finally it exists as a special ki nd of feeling or intuition -- a sense of the oneness of all things in their 
divine principle, a realization (to use the language of Hindu theology) that "thou art That," a mystical experience of 
what seems self-evidently to be union with God. 
 The ordinary waking consciousness is  a very useful and, on most occasions, an indispensable state of mind; 
but it is by no means the only form of consciousness, nor in all circumstances the best. Insofar as he transcends his 
ordinary self and his ordinary mode of awareness, the mystic is able to enlarge his vision, to look more deeply into 
the unfathomable miracle of existence. 
 The mystical experience is doubly va luable; it is valuable  because it gives the experiencer a better 
understanding of himself and the world a nd because it may help him to lead a less self-centered and more creative 
life. 
 In hell, a great religious poet has written, the punishment of the lost is to be "their sweating selves, but 
worse." On earth we are not worse than we are; we are merely our sweating selves, period. 
 Alas, that is quite bad enough. We l ove ourselves to the poin t of idolatry; but we also intensely dislike 
ourselves -- we find ourselves unutterably boring. Correlated with this distaste for trie idolatrously worshiped self, 
there is in all of us a desire, sometimes latent, sometime s conscious and passionately expressed, to escape trom the 
prison of our individuality, an urge to se lf-transcendence. It is to this urge that we owe mystical theology, spiritual

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

175
exercises and yoga -- to this, too, that we owe alcoholism and drug addiction. 
 Modern pharmacology has given us a host of new synthe tics, but in the field of  the naturally occurring 
mind changers it has made no radical di scoveries. All the botanical sedativ es, stimulants, vision revealers, 
happiness promoters and cosmic-conscious ness arousers were found out thousands of years ago, before the dawn 
of history. 
 In many societies at many levels of  civilization attempts have been made to fuse drug intoxication with God 
intoxication. In ancient Greece, for example, ethyl alcoho l had its place in the established religion. Dionysus, or 
Bacchus, as he was often called, was a true divinity. His worshipe rs addressed him as Lusios, "Liberator," or as 
Theoinos, "God-wine." The latter name telescopes fermented grape juice and the supe rnatural into a single 
pentecostal experience. "Born a god," writes Euripides, "Bacchus is poured out as a libation to the gods, and 
through him men receive good." Unfortunately they also  receive harm. The blissful experience of self-
transcendence which alcohol makes possible has to be paid for, and the price is exorbitantly high. 
 Complete prohibition of all chemi cal mind changers can be decreed, but cannot be enforced, and tends to 
create more evils than it cures. Even more unsatisf actory has been the policy of complete toleration and 
unrestricted availability. In England, during the first years of the eighteenth century, cheap  untaxed gin -- "drunk 
for a penny, dead drunk for two-pence" -- threatened society with complete demoralization. A century later, opium, 
in the form of laudanum, was reconciling the victims of the Industrial Revolution to their lot -- but at an appalling 
cost in terms of addiction, illness and early death. Today most civilized societies follow a course between the two 
extremes of total prohibition and tota l toleration. Certain mind-changing dr ugs, such as alcohol, are permitted and 
made available to the pu blic on payment of a very high  tax, which tends to restrict  their consumption. Other mind 
changers are unobtainable except under doc tors' orders -- or illegal ly from a dope pusher. In this way the problem 
is kept within manageable bounds. It is most certainly not  solved. In their ceaseless search for self-transcendence, 
millions of would-be mystics become addicts, commit scor es of thousands of crimes and are involved in hundreds 
of thousands of avoidable accidents. 
 Do we have to go on in this dismal way indefinite ly? Up until a few years a go, the answer to such a 
question would have been a rueful "Y es, we do." Today, thanks to recent developments in biochemistry and 
pharmacology, we are offered a workable alternative. We see that it may s oon be possible for us to do something 
better in the way of chemical self-tra nscendence than what we have been doi ng so ineptly for the last seventy or 
eighty centuries. 
 Is it possible for a powerful drug to be completely  harmless? Perhaps not. But the physiological cost can 
certainly be reduced to the point wh ere it  becomes negligible. There are powerful mind changers which do their 
work without damaging the taker's psychophysical organism and without inciting him to behave like a criminal or a 
lunatic. Biochemistry and pharmacology are just getting into their stride. Within a few years there will probably be 
dozens of powerful but -- physiologically and socially speaking -- very inexpensive mind changers on the market. 
 In view of what we already have in the way of pow erful but nearly harmless drugs; in view, above all, of 
what unquestionably we are very soon going to have -- we ought to start immedi ately to give some serious thought 
to the problem of the new mind changers. How ought they to be used? How  can they be abused? Will human 
beings be better and happier for their discovery? Or worse and more miserable? 
 The matter requires to be examined from many poi nts of view. It is simu ltaneously a question for 
biochemists and physicians, for psychol ogists and social anthropologists, for legislators and law-enforcement 
officers. And finally it is an ethical question and a religious question. Sooner or later -- and the sooner, the better -- 
the various specialists concer ned will have to meet, discus s and then decide, in the lig ht of the best available 
evidence and the most imaginative kind of foresight, what  should be done. Meanwhile let us take a preliminary 
look at this many-faceted problem. 
 Last year American physicians wrote 48,000,000 prescrip tions for tranquilizing drugs, many of which have 
been refilled, probably more than on ce. The tranquilizers are the best know n of the new, nearly harmless mind 
changers. They can be used by most people, not inde ed with complete impunity, but at a reasonably low 
physiological cost. Their enormous popul arity bears witness to th e fact that a great many people dislike both their 
environment and "their sweating selves ." Under tranquilizers the degree of their self-transcendence is not very 
great; but it is enough to make all the difference, in many cases, between misery and contentment. 
 In theory, tranquilizers should be gi ven only to persons suffering from rath er severe forms of neurosis or

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

176
psychosis. In practice, unfortunatel y, many physicians have been carried away by the current pharmacological 
fashion and are prescribing tranquilizers to all and sundry. The history of medical  fashions, it may be remarked, is 
at least as grotesque as the history of fashions in women' s hats -- at least as grotesque and, since human lives are at 
stake, considerably more tragic. In the present case, milli ons of patients who had no r eal need of the tranquilizers 
have been given the pills by their docto rs and have learned to resort to them in every predicament, however 
triflingly uncomfortable. This is very bad medicine a nd, from the pill taker's point of view, dubious morality and 
poor sense. 
 There are circumstances in which even the healthy ar e justified in resorting to the chemical control of 
negative emotions. If you really can't keep your temper, le t a tranquilizer keep it for you. But for healthy people to 
resort to a chemical mind changer every time they feel a nnoyed or anxious or tense is  neither sensible nor right. 
Too much tension and anxiety can redu ce a man's efficiency -- but so can too little. There are many occasions 
when it is entirely proper for us to feel concerned, when an excess of placidity might reduce our chances of dealing 
effectively with a ticklish situation. On these occasions , tension mitigated and directed from within by the 
psychological methods of self-control is  preferable from every point of view to complacency imposed from 
without by the methods of chemical control. 
 And now let us consider the case --  not, alas, a hypothetical case -- of two societie s competing with each 
other. In Society A, tranquilizers are available by prescription and at a rather stiff price -- which means, in practice, 
that their use is confined to that ri ch and influential minority which provides  the society with its leadership. This 
minority of leading citizens consumes several billions of the complacency-producing pills every year. In Society B, 
on the other hand, the tranquilizers are not  so freely available, and the member s of the influential minority do not 
resort, on the slightest provocat ion, to the chemical control of what may be necessary and productive tension. 
Which of these two competing societies is likely to win the race? A society whose leaders make an excessive use 
of soothing syrups is in danger of falling behind a society whose leaders are not overtranquilized. 
 Now let us consider another kind of drug -- still undiscovered, but probably just around the corner -- a drug 
capable of making people feel happy in situations where they would normally feel miserable. Such a drug would be 
a blessing, but a blessing fraught with  grave political dangers. By maki ng harmless chemical euphoria freely 
available, a dictator could reconcile an entire population to a state of affair s to which self-respecting human beings 
ought not to be reconciled. Despots have always found it necessary to supplement force by political or religious 
propaganda. In this sense the pen is mightier than the swor d. But mightier than either the pen or the sword is the 
pill. In mental hospitals it has been found that chemical restraint is far more effec tive than strait jackets or 
psychiatry. The dictatorships of tomorrow will deprive me n of their freedom, but will give them in exchange a 
happiness none the less real, as a subjective experience, for being chemically induced. The pursuit of happiness is 
one of the traditional rights of man; unfortunately, the achievement of happiness may turn out to be incompatible 
with another of man's rights -- namely, liberty. 
 It is quite possible, however, that pharmacology w ill restore with one hand what  it takes away with the 
other. Chemically induced euphoria could easily become a threat to indivi dual liberty; but ch emically induced 
vigor and chemically heightened intelligence could easily be liberty's strongest bulwark. Most of us function at 
about 15 per cent of capacity. How can we step up our lamentably low efficiency? 
 Two methods are available -- the ed ucational and the biochemical. We can take adults and children as they 
are and give them a much better tr aining than we are giving them now. Or, by appropriate biochemical methods, 
we can transform them into superior individuals. If these superior individuals are give n a superior education, the 
results will be revolutionary. They will be startling even  if we continue to subject  them to the rather poor 
educational methods at present in vogue. Will it in fact be possible to produce superior individuals by biochemical 
means? The Russians certainly believe it. They ar e now halfway through a Five Year Plan to produce 
"pharmacological substances that nor malize higher nervous activity and hei ghten human capacity for work." 
Precursors of these future mind improvers are already be ing experimented with. It has been found, for example, 
that when given in massive doses some of the vitamins -- nicotinic acid and ascorbic acid for example -- sometimes 
produce a certain heightening of psychic energy. A co mbination of two enzymes -- ethylene disulphonate and 
adenosine triphosphate, which, when injected together, improve carbohydrate metabolism in nervous tissue -- may 
also turn out to be effective. 
 Meanwhile good results are being claimed for various ne w synthetic, nearly harmless stimulants. There is

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

177
iproniazid, which, according to some authorities, "appear s to increase the total amount of psychic energy." 
Unfortunately, iproniazid in large doses has side effect s which in some cases may be extremely serious. Another 
psychic energizer is an amino alco hol which is thought to increase th e body's production of acetylcholine, a 
substance of prime importance in the functioning of the nervous system. In  view of what has already been 
achieved, it seems quite possible that, within a few years, we may be ab le to lift ourselves up by our own 
biochemical bootstraps. 
 In the meantime let us all fervently wish the Ru ssians every success in their current pharmacological 
venture. The discovery of a drug capable of increasi ng the average individual's ps ychic energy, and its wide 
distribution throughout the U.S.S.R., would probably mean the end of Russia's present form of government. 
Generalized intelligence and mental al ertness are the most powerful enemies of  dictatorship and at the same time 
the basic conditions of effective democracy. Even in th e democratic West we could do with a bit of psychic 
energizing. Between them, education and pharmacology ma y do something to offset the effects of that 
deterioration of our biological material to which geneticists have frequently called attention. 
 From these political and ethical consid erations let us now pass to the strictly religious problems that will be 
posed by some of the new mind changers. We can fores ee the nature of these futu re problems by studying the 
effects of a natural mind changer, which has been used for centuries past in religious worship; I refer to the peyote 
cactus of Northern Mexico and the Southwestern United St ates. Peyote contains mescaline -- which can now be 
produced synthetically -- and mescaline, in William Jame s' phrase, "stimulates the mystical faculties in human 
nature" far more powerfully and in a far more enlightenin g way than alcohol and, what is more, it does so at a 
physiological and social cost that is negligibly low. Peyote produces self-transcendence in two ways -- it introduces 
the taker into the Other World of vi sionary experience, and it gives him a sense of solidarity with his fellow 
worshipers, with human beings at large and with the divine nature of things. 
 The effects of peyote can be duplicated by synthetic mescaline and by LSD (lyser gic acid diethylamide), a 
derivative of ergot. Effective in incredibly small doses, LSD is now being used experimentally by psychotherapists 
in Europe, in South America, in Ca nada and the United States. It lowe rs the barrier between conscious and 
subconscious and permits the patient to look more deeply  and understandingly into the recesses of his own mind. 
The deepening of self-knowledge takes place against a background of visionary and even mystical experience. 
 When administered in the right kind of psychological environment, these chemical mind changers make 
possible a genuine religious experience. Thus a person who takes LSD or mescaline may suddenly understand -- 
not only intellectually but orga nically, experientially -- the meaning of su ch tremendous religious affirmations as 
"God is love," or "Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him." 
 It goes without saying that this kind of tempor ary self-transcendence is no guarantee of permanent 
enlightenment or a lasting improvement of conduct. It is a "gratuitous grace," whic h is neither necessary nor 
sufficient for salvation, but which if pr operly used, can be enormously helpful to those who have received it. And 
this is true of all such ex periences, whether occurring spontaneously, or as the result of swa llowing the right kind 
of chemical mind changer, or after undertaking a course of "spiritual exercises" or bodily mortification. 
 Those who are offended by the idea that the swallowing of a pill may contribute to a genuinely religious 
experience should remember that all the standard mortifications -- fasting, voluntary sleeplessness and self-torture -
- inflicted upon themselves by the ascetic s of every religion for the purpose of acquiring merit, are also, like the 
mind-changing drugs, powerful devices for altering the chem istry of the body in general and the nervous system in 
particular. Or consider the procedur es generally known as spiritual exerci ses. The breathing techniques taught by 
the yogi of India result in prolonged susp ensions of respiration. These in turn result in an increased concentration 
of carbon dioxide in the blood; and th e psychological consequence of this is a change in the quality of 
consciousness. Again, meditations involving long, intens e concentration upon a single idea or image may also 
result -- for neurological reasons which I do not profess to understand -- in a slowing down of respiration and even 
in prolonged suspensions of breathing. 
 Many ascetics and mystics have practiced their chem istry-changing mortifications and spiritual exercises 
while living, for longer or shorter periods, as hermits. Now,  the life of a hermit, such as Saint Anthony, is a life in 
which there are very few external stimuli. But as He bb, John Lilly and other experimental psychologists have 
recently shown in the laboratory, a person in a limited environment, which provides very few external stimuli, soon 
undergoes a change in the quality of his consciousness and may transcend his normal self to the point of hearing

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

178
voices or seeing visions, often extremely unpleasant, like  so many of Saint Anthony's visions, but sometimes 
beatific. 
 That men and women can, by physical and chemical mean s, transcend themselves in a genuinely spiritual 
way is something which, to the squeamish idealist, seems ra ther shocking. But, after all, the drug or the physical 
exercise is not the cause of the spiritual experience; it is only its occasion. 
 Writing of William James' experiments with nitrous oxide, Bergson has summed up the whole matter in a 
few lucid sentences. "The psychic dis position was there, potentially, only wa iting a signal to express itself in 
action. It might have been evoked spiritua lly by an effort made on its own spiritu al level. But it could just as well 
be brought about materially, by an inhibi tion of what inhibited it, by the removi ng of an obstacle; and this effect 
was the wholly negative one produced by the drug." Where,  for any reason, physical or moral, the psychological 
dispositions are unsatisfactory, the rem oval of obstacles by a drug or by ascetic  practices will result in a negative 
rather than a positive spiritual experience. Such an infern al experience is extremely distressing, but may also be 
extremely salutary. There are plenty of people to whom a few hours in  hell -- the hell that  they themselves have 
done so much to create -- could do a world of good. 
 Physiologically costless, or nearly costless, stimula tors of the mystical faculties are now making their 
appearance, and many kinds of them will soon be on the ma rket. We can be quite sure that, as and when they 
become available, they will be extensiv ely used. The urge to self-transcendence is so strong and so general that it 
cannot be otherwise. In the past, very  few people have had spontaneous expe riences of a pre-mystical or fully 
mystical nature; still fewer have been willing to undergo the psychophysical disciplines which prepare an insulated 
individual for this kind of self-transcendence. The powerful but nearly costless mind changers of the future will 
change all this completely. Instead of being rare, premystical and mystical experiences will become common. What 
was once the spiritual privilege of the few will be made available to the many. For th e ministers of the world's 
organized religions, this will raise a number of unprecedented problems. For most people, religion has always been 
a matter of traditional symbols and of their own emotional, intellectua l and ethical response to those symbols. To 
men and women who have had di rect experience of self-transcendence in to the mind's Other World of vision and 
union with the nature of things, a religion of mere symbols is not likely to be very satisfying. The perusal of a page 
from even the most beautifully written cookbook is no substitute for the eating of dinner. We are exhorted to "taste 
and see that the Lord is good." 
 In one way or another, the world's ecclesiastical au thorities will have to come to terms with the new mind 
changers. They may come to terms with them negatively, by refusing to have anything to do with them. In that 
case, a psychological phenomenon, potentially of great spirit ual value, will manifest itself outside the pale of 
organized religion. On the other hand, they may choose to come to terms with the mind changers in some positive 
way -- exactly how, I am not prepared to guess. 
 My own belief is that, though they may start by being something of an embarrassment, these new mind 
changers will tend in the long run to deepen the spiritual li fe of the communities in which they are available. That 
famous "revival of religion," about which so many people have been talking for so long, will not come about as the 
result of evangelistic mass meetings or  the television appearances of photogeni c clergymen. It will come about as 
the result of biochemical discoveries that will make it possible for large numbers of men and women to achieve a 
radical self-transcendence and a deeper understanding of the nature of things. And this revival of religion will be at 
the same time a revolution. From being an activity mainly  concerned with symbols, religion will be transformed 
into an activity concerned mainly with experience and intuition -- an everyday mysticism underlying and giving 
significance to everyday rationality, everyday tasks and duties, everyday human relationships. 
(From The Saturday Evening Post)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

179
WAY OF LIFE 
 
 
Holy Face 
 
 Good Times are chronic nowadays. There is dancing every afternoon, a continuous performance at all the 
picture-palaces, a radio concert on tap, lik e gas or water, at any hour of the da y or night. The fine point of seldom 
pleasure is duly blunted. Feasts must be solemn and rare, or  else they cease to be feasts. "Like stones of worth they 
thinly placed are" (or, at any rate, they were in Shakespeare's day, which was the day of Merry England), "or 
captain jewels in the carconet." The ghos ts of these grand occasional jollificati ons still haunt our modern year. But 
the stones of worth are indistinguishab le from the loud imitation jewelry whic h now adorns the entire circlet of 
days. Gems, when they are too large and too numerous, lo se all their precious signific ance; the treasure of an 
Indian prince is as unimpressive as Aladdin's cave at th e pantomime. Set in the midst of the stage diamonds and 
rubies of modern pleasure, the old f easts are hardly visible. It is only among more or  less completely rustic 
populations, lacking the means and the opportunity to indulge in the modern chronic Good Time, that the surviving 
feasts preserve something of their ancient glory. Me personally the unflagging pleasu res of contemporary cities 
leave most lugubriously unamused. The prevailing boredom -- for oh, how desperately bored, in spite of their grim 
determination to have a Good Time, the majority of pleasure-seekers really ar e! -- the hopeless weariness, infect 
me. Among the lights, the alcoho l, the hideous jazz noises, a nd the incessant movement I feel myself sinking into 
deeper and ever deeper despondency. By comparison with a night-club, churches  are positively gay. If ever I want 
to make merry in public, I go where merry-making is occasional and the merriment, therefore, of genuine quality; I 
go where feasts come rarely. 
 For one who would frequent only the occasional festivities,  the great difficulty is to be in the right place at 
the right time. I have traveled through Belgium and found, in little market towns, kermesses that were orgiastic like 
the merry-making in a Breughel picture. But how to re member the date? And how, remembering it, to be in 
Flanders again at the appointed time ? The problem is almost insoluble. And then there is Frogmore. The 
nineteenth-century sculpture in the royal mausoleum is reputed to be the most amazing of its amazing kind. I 
should like to see Frogmore. But the a nniversary of Queen Victor ia's death is the only da y in the year when the 
temple is open to the public. The old queen died, I believe, in January. But what was the precise date? And, if one 
enjoys the blessed liberty to be elsewhere, how shall one reconcile oneself to being in  England at such a season? 
Frogmore, it seems, will have to remain unvisited. And there are many other places, many other dates and days, 
which, alas, I shall always miss. I must even be resigne dly content with the few fe stivities whose times I can 
remember and whose scene coincides, more or less, with that of my existence in each particular portion of the year. 
 One of these rare and solemn dates which I happen never to forget is September the thirteenth. It is the feast 
of the Holy Face of Lucca. And since Lu cca is within thirty mile s of the seaside place where I spend the summer, 
and since the middle of September is still serenely and transparently summe r by the shores of the Mediterranean, 
the feast of the Holy Face is counted among the captain jewels of my year. At th e religious function and the 
ensuing fair I am, each September, a regular attendant. 
 "By the Holy Face of Lucca!" It wa s William the Conqueror's favorite oath. And if I were in the habit of 
cursing and swearing, I think it would also be mine. For it is a fine oath, admirable both in form and substance. "By 
the Holy Face of Lucca!" In whatever language you pronounce them, the words reverberate, they rumble with the 
rumbling of genuine poetry. And for any one who has ever s een the Holy Face, how pregnant they are with power 
and magical compulsion! For the Face, the Holy Face of Lucca, is certainly the strangest, the most impressive thing 
of its kind I have ever seen. 
 Imagine a huge wooden Christ, larger than life, not naked, as in later representations of the Crucifixion, but 
dressed in a long tunic, formally fluted  with stiff Byzantine folds. The face is  not the face of a dead, or dying, or 
even suffering man. It is the face of a man still violently aliv e, and the expression of its strong features is stern, is 
fierce, is even rather sinister. From the dark socket s of polished cedar wood two yellowish tawny eyes, made, 
apparently, of some precious stone, or perhaps of glass, stare out, sli ghtly squinting, with an unsleeping 
balefulness. Such is the Holy Face. Tr adition affirms it to be a true, contem porary portrait. History establishes the 
fact that it has been in Lucca for the best  part of twelve hundred years. It is said that a rudderless and crewless ship

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

180
miraculously brought it from Palestine to the beaches of  Luni. The inhabitants of Sarzana claimed the sacred 
flotsam; but the Holy Face did not wish to go to Sarzan a. The oxen harnessed to the wagon in which it had been 
placed were divinely inspired to take  the road to Lucca. And at Lucca the F ace has remained ever since, working 
miracles, drawing crowds of pilgrims, protecting and at in tervals failing to protect the city of its adoption from 
harm. Twice a year, at Easter time and on the thirteenth of September, the doors of its little domed tabernacle in the 
cathedral are thrown open, the candles are lighted, and the dark and formidable image, dressed up for the occasion 
in a jeweled overall and with a glittering crown on its h ead, stares down -- with who knows what mysterious 
menace in its bright squinting eyes? -- on the throng of its worshipers. 
 The official act of worship is a most handsome func tion. A little after sunset a procession of clergy forms 
up in the church of San Frediano. In the ancient darkness of  the basilica a few candles li ght up the liturgical ballet. 
The stiff embroidered vestments, worn by generations of priests and from which the heads and hands of the present 
occupants emerge with an air of almost total irrelevance (for it is the sacramental car apace that matters; the little 
man who momentarily fills it is without  significance), move hieratically hith er and thither through the rich light 
and the velvet shadows. Under his baldaquin the jeweled old archbishop is a museum specimen. There is a forest of 
silvery mitres, spear-shaped against the darkness (bishops se em to be plentiful in Lucca). The choir boys wear lace 
and scarlet. There is a guard of halb erdiers in a gaudily-pied medieval unif orm. The ritual charade is solemnly 
danced through. The procession emerges from the dark church  into the twilight of the st reets. The municipal band 
strikes up loud inappropriate music. We hurry off to the cathedral by a short cut to take our places for the function. 
 The Holy Face has always had a partiality for music.  Yearly, through all these hu ndreds of years, it has 
been sung to and played at, it has been treated to sy mphonies, cantatas, solos on every instrument. During the 
eighteenth century the most celebrated castrati came from the ends of Italy to warble to it; the most eminent 
professors of the violin, the flute, the oboe, the trombone scraped and blew before its shrine. Paganini himself, 
when he was living in Lucca in the court of Elisa Bonaparte, performed at the annual concerts in honor of the Face. 
Times have changed, and the image must now be content with local talent and a lower standard of musical 
excellence. True, the good will is alwa ys there; the Lucchesi continue to do their musical best; but their best is 
generally no more nor less than just dully creditable. Not always, however. I shall never forget what happened 
during my first visit to the Face. The musical program that year was ambitious. Th ere was to be a rendering, by 
choir and orchestra, of one of those va st oratorios which the clerical musici an, Dom Perosi, composes in a strange 
and rather frightful mixture of the musi cal idioms of Palestrina, Wagner, a nd Verdi. The orchestra was enormous; 
the choir was numbered by the hundred; we waited in pleased  anticipation for the music to begin. But when it did 
begin, what an astounding pandemonium! Everybody played  and sang like mad, but without apparently any 
reference to the playing and singing of anybody else. Of all the musical performances I have ever listened to it was 
the most Manchester-Liberal, the most Victorian-democratic. The conductor stood in the midst of them waving his 
arms; but he was only a constitutional monarch -- for s how, not use. The performers had revolted against his 
despotism. Nor had they permitted themselves to be re gimented into Prussian uniformity by any soul-destroying 
excess of rehearsal. Godwin's prophetic vision of a perfectly individualistic concert was here actually realized. The 
noise was hair-raising. But the performers  were making it with so much gusto that, in the end, I was infected by 
their high spirits and enjoyed the hulla baloo almost as much as they did. That concert was symptomatic of the 
general anarchy of post-war Italy. Those times are now past. The Fascists have come, bringing order and discipline 
-- even to the arts. When the Lucchesi play and sing to  their Holy Face, they do it now with decorum, in a 
thoroughly professional and well-drilled manner. It is admira ble, but dull. There are times, I must confess, when I 
regret the loud delirious blaring and bawling of the days of anarchy. 
 Almost more interesting than the official acts of wo rship are the unofficial, the private and individual acts. I 
have spent hours in the cathedral watc hing the crowd before the sh rine. The great church is full from morning till 
night. Men and women, young and old, they come in their thousands, from the town, from all the country round, to 
gaze on the authentic image of God. And the image is dark, threatening, and sinister. In the eyes of the worshipers I 
often detected a certain meditative disquiet. Not unnaturally. For if the face of Providence should really and in truth 
be like the Holy Face, why, then -- then  life is certainly no joke. Anxious to propitiate this rather appalling image 
of Destiny, the worshipers come pressing up to the shrine to  deposit a little offering of s ilver or nickel and kiss the 
reliquary proffered to every almsgiver by the attendant priest. For two francs fifty perhaps Fate will be kind. But 
the Holy Face continues, unmoved, to squint inscrutable me nace. Fixed by that sinister regard, and with the smell

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

181
of incense in his nostrils, the darkness of the church aroun d and above him, the most or dinary man begins to feel 
himself obscurely a Pascal. Me taphysical gulfs open before him. The myst eries of human destiny, of the future, of 
the purpose of life oppress and terrify his s oul. The church is dark; but in the mi dst of the darkness is a little island 
of candlelight. Oh, comfort! But from the heart of the comforting light, incongruously jeweled, the dark face stares 
with squinting eyes, appalling, balefully mysterious. 
 But luckily, for those of us who ar e not Pascal, there is al ways a remedy. We can al ways turn our back on 
the Face, we can always leave the hollow darkness of the church. Outside, the su nlight pours down out of a 
flawless sky. The streets are full of people in their holiday best. At one of the gates of  the city, in an open space 
beyond the walls, the merry-go-rounds are turning, the steam organs are playi ng the tunes that were popular four 
years ago on the other side of the Atlantic, the fat wo man's drawers hang unmoving, like a huge forked pennon, in 
the windless air outside her booth. There is a crowd, a sme ll, an unceasing noise -- musi c and shouting, roaring of 
circus lions, giggling of tickled girls,  squealing from the switchback of delic iously frightened girls, laughing and 
whistling, tooting of cardboa rd trumpets, cracking of guns in the rifl e-range, breaking of crockery, howling of 
babies, all blended together to form  the huge and formless sound of human ha ppiness. Pascal was wise, but wise 
too consciously, with too consistent a spirituality. For him the Holy Face was always present, haunting him with its 
dark menace, with the mystery of its baleful eyes. And if ever, in a moment of distraction, he forgot the 
metaphysical horror of the world and those abysses at his feet, it was with a pa ng of remorse that he came again to 
himself, to the self of spiritual consciousness. He thought it right to be haunted, he refused to enjoy the pleasures of 
the created world, he liked walking among the gulfs. In his excess of conscious wisdom he was mad; for he 
sacrificed life to principles, to meta physical abstractions, to the overmuch spirituality which is the negation of 
existence. He preferred death to life. Incomparably gr osser and stupider than Pascal, almost immeasurably his 
inferiors, the men and women who move with shouting and laughter through the dusty heat of the fair are yet more 
wise than the philosopher. They are wi se with the unconscious wisdom of the species, with the dumb, instinctive, 
physical wisdom of life itself. For it is life itself that, in the interests of living, commands them to be inconsistent. 
It is life itself that, having made them obscurely aware of Pascal's gulfs and horrors, bids them turn away from the 
baleful eyes of the Holy Face, bids them walk out of the dark, hushed, incense-smelling church into the sunlight, 
into the dust and whirling motion, the sweaty smell and the vast chaotic noise of the fair. It is life itself; and I, for 
one, have more confidence in the rightness of life than in that of any individual man, even if the man be Pascal. 
(From Do What You Will) 
 
 
 
Pascal 
 
Life and the Routine of Living 
 It is worth remarking that the re velation of life confirms many of th e revelations of death.* The business 
and the distractions which Pascal hated so much, because th ey made men forget that they  must die, are hateful to 
the life-worshiper because they prevent men from fully living. Death makes these dist ractions seem  trivial and 
silly; but equally so does life. It was from pain and gra dually approaching dissolution that Ivan Ilyitch learned to 
understand the futility of his respectable bourgeois career. If he had ever met a genuinely living man, if he had ever 
read a book, or looked at a picture, or heard a piece of music by a living artist, he would have learned the same 
lesson. But Pascal and the later Tolst oy would not permit the re velation to come from life. Their aim was to 
humiliate men by rolling them in the corruption of the grave, to inflict a defiling punishment on them; they 
condemned, not only the distracting, life-destroying futilities with which men fill their days, but also the life which 
these futilities destroyed. The life-worshiper agrees with  them in hating the empty f ooleries and sordidnesses of 
average human existence. Incidentally  the progress of science and industry has enormously increased the element 
of foolery and sordidness in human life. The clerk and the taylorized workman leave their imbecile tasks to spend 
their leisure under the influence of such opiate distractions as are provided by the newspaper, the cinema, the radio; 
they are given less and less opportunity  to do any active or crea tive living of their own. Pa scal and Tolstoy would 
have led them from silliness to despair by talking to them  of death; but "memento vivere" is the life-worshiper's 
advice. If people remembered to live, they would abstain from occupations which are mere substitutes for life.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

182
 
* I have borrowed the phrase from Shestov. 'La Revelation de la Mo rt' is the title, in its French translation, of one of his mo st 
interesting books. 
 
The Life-Worshiper's Creed 
 The life-worshiper's philosophy is comprehensive. As  a manifold and discontinuous being, he is in a 
position to accept all the partial and appa rently contradictory syntheses constructed by other philosophers. He is at 
one moment a positivist and at another a mystic: now haunted  by the thought of death (for the apocalypse of death 
is one of the incidents of living) and now a Dionysian child  of nature; now a pessimist and now, with a change of 
lover or liver or even the weather, an exuberant believer that God's in his heav en and all's right with the world. He 
holds these different beliefs because he is many different people. Each belief is the rationalization of the prevailing 
mood of one of these persons. There is really no question of any of these philosophies being true or false. The 
psychological state called joy is no true r than the psychological state called melancholy (it may be more valuable 
as an aid to social or individual living -- but that is another matter). Each is a primary fact of experience. And since 
one psychological state cannot be truer than another, since all are equally facts, it follows that the rationalization of 
one state cannot be truer than the rati onalization of another. What Hardy says  about the universe is no truer than 
what Meredith says; if the majority of contempor ary readers prefer the wo rld-view expressed in Tess of the 
D'Urbervilles to the optimism which forms the background to Beauchamp's Career, that is simply because they 
happen to live in a very depressing age and consequently  suffer from a more or less chronic melancholy. Hardy 
seems to them truer than Meredith  because the philosophy of  "Tess" and "Jude" is more adequate as a 
rationalization of their own prevailing mood than the ph ilosophy of Richard Feverel or  Beauchamp. What applies 
to optimism and pessimism applies equally to other trends  of philosophical thought. Even  the doctrines of "fixed 
fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute," for all the elaborat eness of their form, are in substance only expression of 
emotional and physiological states. One feels free or one feels conditioned. Both feelings are equally facts of 
experience, so are the facts called "mystical ecstasy" and "reasonableness." Only a man whose life was rich in 
mystical experiences could have constructed a cosmogony lik e that of Boehme's; and th e works of Voltaire could 
have been written only by one whose life was singularly poor  in such experiences. People with strongly marked 
idiosyncrasies of character have their world-view almost forced upon them by their psychology. The only branches 
of philosophy in regard to which it is permissible to ta lk of truth and falsehood ar e logic and the theory of 
knowledge. For logic and the theory of knowledge are concerned with the necessities and the limitations of thought 
-- that is to say, with mental habits so primordial that  it is all but impossible for an y human being to break them. 
When a man commits a paralogism or lays claim to a more  than human knowledge of the nature of things, we are 
justified in saying that he is wrong. I may, for example, ad mit that all men are mortal and that Socrates is a man, 
but nevertheless feel impelled to  conclude that Socrates is immortal. Am I not as well jus tified in this opinion as I 
am in my optimism or pessimism, whichever the case may be? The answer is: no. I may have a personal taste for 
Socrates's immortality; but, in the syll ogistic circumstances, the taste is so outrageously bad, so universally 
condemned, that it would be madness to tr y to justify it. Moreover,  I should discover that, if I put my paralogistic 
theories into practice, I should find myself in serious trouble, not only with other hu man beings, but even with 
things. The hero of Dostoievsky's Notes from Underground protests against the intolerable tyranny of two and two 
making four. He prefers that they shall make five, and insists that he has a right to his preference. And no doubt he 
has a right. But if an express train happens to be passing at  a distance of two plus two yards, and he advances four 
yards and a half under the impression that he will still be eighteen inches on the hither side of destruction, this right 
of his will not save him from coming to a violent and bloody conclusion. 
 Scientific thought is true or false because science d eals with sense impressions which are, if not identical 
for all human beings, at least sufficiently similar to  make something like universal agreement possible. The 
difference between a scientific  theory and a metaphysical world-view is that the fi rst is a rationalization of 
psychological experiences which are more or less uniform for all men and for the same man at different times, 
while the second is a rationalization of experiences whic h are diverse, occasional, and contradictory. A man may 
be a pessimistic determinist before lunch and an optimis tic believer in the will's freedom after it; but both before 
and after his meal he will obs erve that the color of the s ky is blue, that stones are har d, that the sun gives light and 
warmth. It is for this reason that there are many philosophies, and only one science. 
 But even science demands that its votaries shall thi nk, according to circumstances, in a variety of different

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

183
ways. The mode of thinking which gives valid results when applied to objects of more th an a certain size (in other 
words, to large numbers of objects; fo r anything big enough to be perceptible to our senses is built up, apparently, 
of enormous numbers of almost infinite simal components) is found to be absolu tely inapplicable to single objects 
of atomic or subatomic dimensions. A bout large agglomerations of atoms we  can think in terms of "organized 
common sense." But when we come to consider indivi dual atoms and their minuter  components, common-sense 
gives results which do not square with the observed fact s. (Nobody, of course, has ever actually observed an atom 
or an electron; but the nature of their behavior can be inferred, with more or less probability, from such happenings 
on a macroscopical scale as accompany their invisible ac tivity.) In the sub-atomic world practically all our 
necessities of thought become not only unnecessary but misleading. A description of this universe reads like a page 
from Lewis Carroll or Edward Lear. 
 Seeing, then, that even sense impressions not only can but must be rationalized in irreconcilably different 
ways, according to the class of object with which they are supposed to be connected, we need not be troubled or 
surprised by the contradictions which we find in the rationalization of less unif orm psychological experiences. 
Thus, the almost indefinitely numerous rationalizations of the aesthetic and the mystical experiences not only 
contradict one another, but agree in contradicting those rationalizations of sense experience know n as scientific 
theories. This fact greatly disturbe d our grandfathers, who ke pt on losing their faith, sa crificing their reason, 
striking attitudes of stoical de spair, and, in general, performing the most extraordinary spiritual antics, because of 
it. Science is "true," they argued; th erefore art and relig ion, therefore beauty and honor , love and ideals, must be 
"false." "Reality" has been "proved" by science to be an affair of space, tim e, mass, number, and cause; therefore 
all that makes life worth living is an "ill usion." Or else they started from the other end. Art, religion, beauty, love, 
make life worth living; therefore science, which disregards  the existence of these things, must be false. It is 
unnecessary for us to take so tragic a view. Science, we have come to realize, takes no cognizance of the things that 
make life worth living, for the simple reason that beaut y, love, and so on, are not m easurable quantities, and 
science deals only with what can be measured. One psychological fact is as good as another. We perceive beauty as 
immediately as we perceive hardness; to say that one sensation is illusory  and that the othe r corresponds with 
reality is a gratuitous piece of presumption. 
 Answers to the riddle of the univers e often have a logical form and are expressed in such a way that they 
raise questions of epistemology and invol ve the acceptance or rejecti on of certain scie ntific theories. In substance, 
however, they are simply rationalizati ons of diverse and equally valid psyc hological states, and are therefore 
neither true nor false. (Incidentally, si milar states are not necessarily or invariably rationalized in the same way. 
Mystical experiences which, in Europe, are explained in terms of a personal God are interpreted by the Buddhists 
in terms of an entirely g odless order of things. Which is the truer rationalization?  God, or not-God, whichever the 
case may be, knows.) The life-worshiper who adopts in turn all the solutions to the cosmic riddle is committing no 
crime against logic or the truth. He is simply admitting the obvious fact that he is a huma n being -- that is to say, a 
series of distinct psychological stat es, a colony of diverse personalities . Each state demands its appropriate 
rationalizations; or, in other words, each personality has its own philosophies of life. Philosophical consistency had 
some justification so long as it could be imagined that th e substance of one's world-view (as opposed to the logical 
trappings in which it was clothed and the problems of epistemology and science connect ed with it) was uniquely 
true. But if we admit, as I think we must, that one world- view cannot be truer than anot her, but that each is the 
expression in intellectual terms of some given and undeni able fact of experience, then consistency loses all 
philosophical merit. It is pointless to ignore all the occasi ons when you feel that the world is good, for the sake of 
being consistently a pessimist; it is pointless, for the sake of being cons istently a positivist, to deny that your body 
is sometimes tenanted by a person who has mystical experiences. Pessimism is no truer than optimism, nor 
positivism than mysticism. Philosophically, there is no reason why a man should deny the thoughts of all but one 
of his potential selves. Each self on occasion exists; each has its feelings about the universe, its cosmic tastes -- or, 
to put it in a different way, each inhabits its own universe. What relation these various private universes bear to the 
Universe in Itself, if such a thing exists, it is clearly impossible to say. We can believe, if we like, that each of them 
represents one aspect of the whole. "In my Father's house are many mansions." Nature has given to each individual 
the key to quite a number of these metaphysical mansions. The life-worshi per suggests that man shall make use of 
all his keys instead of throwing all but one of them away. He admits the fact of vital diversity and makes the best of 
it. In this he is unlike the general run of thinkers, who ar e very reluctant to admit dive rsity, and, if they do confess

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

184
the fact, deplore it. They find diversity shocking, they desire at all costs to correct it. And even if it came to be 
universally admitted that no one world- view could possibly be true, these people would continue, none the less, to 
hold fast to one to the exclusion of all the rest. They would go on worshiping consistency, if not on ph ilosophical, 
then on moral grounds. Or, in other words, they w ould practice and demand cons istency through fear of 
inconsistency, through fear of being dangerously free, throu gh fear of life. For morality  is always the product of 
terror; its chains and strait-waistcoats are fashioned by those who dare not trust others, because they dare not trust 
themselves, to walk in liberty. By su ch poor terror-stricken creatures consis tency in thought and conduct is prized 
among the highest virtues. In order to ach ieve this consistency they reject as untrue, or as immoral or antisocial (it 
matters not which; for any stick w ill serve to beat a dog), all the th oughts which do not harmonize with the 
particular system they have elected to defend; they do their best to repress all impulses and desires which cannot be 
fitted into their scheme of moral behavior. With what deplorable results! 
 
Pascal, the Death-Worshiper 
 The consistent thinker, the consistently moral man, is either a walking mummy or else, if he has not 
succeeded in stifling all his vitality, a fanatical monomaniac. (By the admire rs of consistency the mummies are 
called "serene" or "stoical," the mo nomaniacs "single-minded" -- as though single-mindedness were a virtue in a 
being to whom bountiful nature has given a multiple mind! Single-mindedness is all very well in cows or baboons; 
in an animal claiming to belong to the same species as Shakespeare it is simply disgraceful.) 
 In spite of all his heroic efforts, Pascal never succeeded in entirely suppre ssing the life that was in him. It 
was not in his power to turn himself into a pious automaton. Vitality continued to flow out of him, but through only 
one channel. He became a monomaniac, a man with but one aim -- to impose the death of Christian spirituality on 
himself and all his fellows. "What religion," he asks, "will teach us to cure pride and concupiscence?" In other 
words, what religion will cure us of living? For concupiscence, or desire, is the instrument of life, and "the pride of 
the peacock is the glory of God" -- not of Pascal's G od, of course, but of the God of Life. Christianity, he 
concludes, is the only religion which will cure men of liv ing. Therefore all men must become Christians. Pascal 
expended all his extraordinary powers in  trying, by persuasion, by argument, to convert his fellows to consistent 
death-worship. It was with the Provincial Letters that he opened the campai gn. With what consummate 
generalship! The casuists were routed with terrific slaught er. Entranced by that marvelous prose, we find ourselves 
even now believing that their defeat was merited, that Pa scal was in the right. But if we stop our ears to the 
charmer's music and consider only the s ubstance of what he says, we shall re alize that the rights were all on the 
side of the Jesuits and that Pascal wa s using his prodigious talents to make the worse appear the better cause. The 
casuists were often silly and pedantic. But their conception of morality was, from a life- worshiper's point of view, 
entirely sound. Recognizi ng the diversity of human beings, the infinite  variety of circumstances, they perceived 
that every case should be considered on its own merits. Life was to be tethered , but with an elastic rope; it was to 
be permitted to do a little gamboling. To Pascal this libertarianism seemed horrible. There must be no compromise 
with life; the hideous th ing must be ruthlessly suppressed. Men must be bound down by rigid commandments, 
coffined in categorical imperatives, para lyzed by the fear of hell and the in cessant contemplation of death, buried 
under mounds of prohibitions. He said so with such exquisi te felicity of phrase and ca dence that people have gone 
on imagining, from that day to this, that he was upholdi ng a noble cause, when in fact he was fighting for the 
powers of darkness. 
 After the Letters came the Pensées -- the fragmentary materials of what  was to have been a colossal work 
of Christian apology. Implacably the fight against life continued. "Admiration spoils everything from childhood 
onwards. Oh, isn't he clever! Isn't he good! The children of  the Port Royal school, who are not urged on with this 
spur of envy and glory, sink into i ndifference." Pascal must have been de lighted. A system of education which 
resulted in children sinking into "l a nonchalance" was obviously, in his eyes , almost ideal. If the children had 
quietly withered up into mummies, it w ould have been absolutely perfect. Th e man was to be treated to the same 
deadening influences as the child. It was first to be dem onstrated that he lived in a state of hopeless wretchedness. 
This is a task which Pascal undertook with the greatest satisfaction. All his remarks on the "misère de l'homme" are 
magnificent. But what is this misery? When we examine Pa scal's arguments we find that man's misery consists in 
not being something different from a ma n. In not being simple, consistent, w ithout desires, omniscient and dead, 
but on the contrary alive and full of concupiscence, uncertain, inconsistent, multiple. But to blame a thing for not

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

185
being something else is childish. Sheep are not men; but that is no reason for talking about the "misère du mouton." 
Let sheep make the best of their shee pishness and men of their humanity. Bu t Pascal does not want men to make 
the best of their human life; he wants them to make the worst of it, to throw it away. After depressing them with his 
remarks about misery, he brings them into paralyzing contact with death and infi nity; he demonstrates the 
nothingness, in the face of this darkness, these immensitie s, of every thought, action, and desire. To clinch the 
argument he invokes the Jansenist God, th e Christian revelation. If it is man's true nature to be consistent and 
undesiring, then (such is Pascal's argume nt) Jansenistic death-worship is a psyc hological necessity. It is more than 
a psychological necessity; death-worship has been made  obligatory by the God of Death in person, has been 
decreed in a revelation which Pascal undertakes to prove indubitably historical. 
 
Pascal's Universe 
 The spectacle of so much malignity, so much hatre d, is profoundly repulsive. Hate  begets hate, and it is 
difficult not to detest Pascal for his venomous detesta tion of everything that is beautiful and noble in human 
existence. It is a detestation, however, which must be tempered with pity. If the man sinned against the Holy Ghost 
-- and surely few men have sinned like Pascal, since few indeed have been endowed with Pascal's extraordinary 
gifts -- it was because he could not help it. 
 His desires, in Blake's words, were  weak enough to be restrained. Feeble , a sick man, he was afraid of life, 
he dreaded liberty. Acquainted only with the mystical states  that are associated with malady and deprivation, this 
ascetic had never experienced those other, no less significant, states that accompany the fulfillment of desire. For if 
we admit the significance of the mystical rapture, we must  equally admit the significance of the no less prodigious 
experiences associated with love in all its forms, with the perception of sensuous beauty, with  intoxication, with 
rhythmic movement, with anger, with strife and triumph, with a ll the positive manifestations of concupiscent life. 
Ascetic practices produce a condition of abnormality and so enable the ascetic to get out of the ordinary world into 
another and, as he feels, more signi ficant and important universe. Anger, th e feeling inspired by sensuous beauty, 
the orgasm of amorous desire, are abnormal states precisely analogous to the state of mystical ecstasy, states which 
permit the angry man, the aesthete, the lover, to become temporary inhabitants of non-Podsnapian universes which 
are immediately felt (just as the mystic's universe is imme diately felt) to be of pecu liar value and significance. 
Pascal was acquainted with only one abnormal universe -- that which the ecstatic mystic briefly inhabits. Of all the 
rest he had no personal knowledge; his sickly body did not perm it of his approaching them. We condemn easily 
that which we do not know, and with pl easure that which, like the fox who sa id the grapes were sour, we cannot 
enjoy. 
 To a sickly body Pascal joined an ex traordinarily powerful analytical intellect. Too acute to be taken in by 
the gross illusions of rationalism, too subtle to imagine that a homemade abst raction could be a reality, he derided 
the academic philosophers. He perceived that the basis of reason is  unreasonable; first prin ciples come from "the 
heart," not from the mind. The discover y would have been of the first importa nce if Pascal had only made it with 
the right organ. But instead of discovering the heart with the heart, he discovered it with the head. It was abstractly 
that he rejected abstractions, and wi th the reason that he discovered unrea son. His realism was only theoretical; he 
never lived it. His intelligence would not permit him to  find satisfaction in the noumena and abstractions of 
rationalist philosophy. But for fixed noumena and simple unchanging abstractions he none the less longed. He was 
able to satisfy these longings of an invalid philosopher and at th e same time to salve his intellectual conscience by 
choosing an irrational abstraction to believe in -- the God of Christianity. Marooned on that static Rock of Ages, he 
felt himself safe -- safe from the heav ing flux of appearances, safe from divers ity, safe from the responsibilities of 
freedom, safe from life. If he had allo wed himself to have a heart to understa nd the heart with, if he had possessed 
a body with which to understand the body, and instincts and desi res capable of interpreting the meaning of instinct 
and desire, Pascal might have been a life-worshiper instead of a devotee of death. But illness had strangled the life 
out of his body and made his desires so weak that to resist them was an easy virtue. Against his heart he struggled 
with all the force of his tense and focused will. The Moloch of religious principle demanded its sacrifice. 
Obediently, Pascal performed the rite of harakiri. Moloch, unsatisfied, demanded still more blood. Pascal offered 
his services; he would make other pe ople do as he had done. Moloch shoul d be glutted with entrails. All his 
writings are persuasive invitations to the world to come and commit suicide. It is the triumph of principle and 
consistency.

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

186
 
Musical Conclusion 
 And yet the life-worshiper is also, in his own way, a man of principles and consistency. To live intensely -- 
that is his guiding principle. His dive rsity is a sign that he consistently tr ies to live up to his principles; for the 
harmony of life -- of the single life that persists as a gradually changing unity through time -- is a harmony built up 
of many elements. The unity is mutilated by the suppression of any part of the diversity. A fugue has need of all its 
voices. Even in the rich counterpoint of life each separate small melody plays its indispensable part. The diapason 
closes full in man. In man. But Pascal aspired to be more than a man. Among the interlaced melodies of the human 
counterpoint are love songs and anacr eontics, marches and savage dance- rhythms, hymns of  hate and loud 
hilarious chanties. Odious voices in the ears of one who wanted hi s music to be wholly celestial! Pascal 
commanded them to be still and they we re silent. Bending toward his life, we  listen expectantly for a strain of 
angelic singing. But across the centuries what harsh and painful sounds come creaking down to us! 
(From "Pascal," Do What You Will) 
 
 
 
Beliefs 
 
 No account of the scientific pictur e of the world and its history would be complete unless it contained a 
reminder of the fact, frequently forgotten by scientists th emselves, that this picture does not even claim to be 
comprehensive. From the world we actually live in, the wo rld that is given by our sens es, our intuitions of beauty 
and goodness, our emotions and impulses, our moods and se ntiments, the man of scie nce abstracts a simplified 
private universe of things possessing onl y those qualities which used to be calle d "primary." Arbitrarily, because it 
happens to be convenient, because his methods do not allo w him to deal with the immense complexity of reality, 
he selects from the whole of experience only those elements which can be weighed, measured, numbered, or which 
lend themselves in any other way to mathematical trea tment. By using this technique of simplification and 
abstraction, the scientist has succeeded to an astonish ing degree in understanding and dominating the physical 
environment. The success was intoxicating and, with an  illogicality which, in the circumstances, was doubtless 
pardonable, many scientists and philosophers came to imagin e that this useful abstrac tion from reality was reality 
itself. Reality as actually experienced c ontains intuitions of value and signifi cance, contains love, beauty, mystical 
ecstasy, intimations of godhead. Science di d not and still does not possess intellectual instruments with which to 
deal with these aspects of reality. Consequently it ignored them and concentrated its attention upon such aspects of 
the world as it could deal with by mean s of arithmetic, geometry and the vari ous branches of higher mathematics. 
Our conviction that the world is meaningl ess is due in part to the fact (dis cussed in a later pa ragraph) that the 
philosophy of meaninglessness lends itself ve ry effectively to furthering the ends of erotic or political passion; in 
part to a genuine intellectual error -- the error of identifying the world of sc ience, a world from which all meaning 
and value has been deliberately excluded, with ultimate realit y. It is worth while to quote in this context the words 
with which Hume closes his Enquiry. "If we take in our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics, for 
instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number? No. Does it contain any 
experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact or evidence? No. Commit it th en to the flames; for it can contain 
nothing but sophistry and illusion." Hume mentions only divinity and school metaphysics; but his argument would 
apply just as cogently to poetry, music, painting, sculptur e and all ethical and religious  teaching. Hamlet contains 
no abstract reasoning concer ning quantity or number and no experimental reason concerning evidence; nor does 
the Hammerklavier Sonata, nor Donatello's David, nor the Tao Te Ching, nor the Following of Christ. Commit 
them therefore to the flames: for they can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion. 
 We are living now, not in the delicious intoxication induced by the early successes of science, but in a 
rather grisly morning-after, when it ha s become apparent that what triumpha nt science has done hitherto is to 
improve the means for achieving unimprove d or actually deteriorated ends. In  this condition of apprehensive 
sobriety we are able to see that the contents of literature, art, music -- even in some measure of divinity and school 
metaphysics -- are not sophistry and illu sion, but simply those elements of e xperience which scientists chose to 
leave out of account, for the good reason that they had no intellectual methods for dealing with them. In the arts, in

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

187
philosophy, in religion men are trying -- doubtless, without complete success -- to describe and explain the non-
measurable, purely qualitative aspects of reality. Since th e time of Galileo, scientists have admitted, sometimes 
explicitly but much more often by implication, that they  are incompetent to discuss such matters. The scientific 
picture of the world is what it is because men of sc ience combine this incompetence with certain special 
competences. They have no right to claim that this pr oduct of incompetence and sp ecialization is  a complete 
picture of reality. As a matter of historical fact, however, this claim has constantly been made. The successive steps 
in the process of identifying an arbitrar y abstraction from reality with reality itself have been described, very fully 
and lucidly, in Burtt's excellent "Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science"; and it is therefore unnecessary for 
me to develop the theme any further. All that I need add is  the fact that, in recent years, many men of science have 
come to realize that the scientific pict ure of the world is a partial one -- th e product of their special competence in 
mathematics and their special incompetence to deal syst ematically with aesthetic and moral values, religious 
experiences and intuitions of significance. Unhappil y, novel ideas become acceptable to the less intelligent 
members of society only with a very considerable time-lag.  Sixty or seventy years ago the majority of scientists 
believed -- and the belief often caused th em considerable distress -- that the product of their special incompetence 
was identical with reality as a whole. Today this belief ha s begun to give way, in scientific circles, to a different 
and obviously truer conception of the re lation between science and total experience. The masses, on the contrary, 
have just reached the point where the ancestors of today' s scientists were standing tw o generations back. They are 
convinced that the scientific picture of an arbitrary abstraction from real ity is a picture of reality as a whole and 
that therefore the world is without meaning or value. But nobody likes living in such a world. To satisfy their 
hunger for meaning and value, they turn to such doctrin es as nationalism, fascism and revolutionary communism. 
Philosophically and scientifically, thes e doctrines are absurd; but for the ma sses in every community, they have 
this great merit: they attribute the meaning and value that have been taken away from the world as a whole to the 
particular part of the world in which the believers happen to be living. 
 These last considerations raise an  important question, which must now be  considered in some detail. Does 
the world as a whole possess the value and meaning that we constantly attribute to cert ain parts of it (such as 
human beings and their works); and, if so, what is the nature of that value and meaning? This is a question which, a 
few years ago, I should not even have posed. For, like so many of my contemporaries, I took it for granted that 
there was no meaning. This was partly due to the fact that  I shared the common belief that  the scientific picture of 
an abstraction from reality was a true picture of reality as a whole; partly also to other, non-intellectual reasons. I 
had motives for not wanting the world to have a meaning; consequently a ssumed that it had none, and was able 
without any difficulty to find satisfying reasons for this assumption. 
 Most ignorance is vincible ignorance. We don't know because we don't want to know. It is our will that 
decides how and upon what subjects we  shall use our intelligence. Those w ho detect no meaning in the world 
generally do so because, for one reason or another, it suits their books that the world should be meaningless. 
 The behavior of the insane is merely sane behavi or, a bit exaggerated and di storted. The abnormal casts a 
revealing light upon the normal. Hence th e interest attaching, among other madmen, to the extravagant figure of 
the Marquis de Sade. The marquis prided himself upon  being a thinker. His books , indeed, contain more 
philosophy than pornography. The hungry smut-hound must pl ough through long chapters of  abstract speculation 
in order to find the cruelties and ob scenities for which he hungers. De Sa de's philosophy was the philosophy of 
meaninglessness carried to its logical conclusion. Life was without significan ce. Values were illusory and ideals 
merely the inventions of cunning priests and kings. Sens ations and animal pleasures  alone possessed reality and 
were alone worth living for. There was no reason why any one should have the slightes t consideration for any one 
else. For those who found rape and murder amusing, rape and murder were fully legitimate activities. And so on. 
 Why was the Marquis unable to find any value or signi ficance in the world? Was his intellect more piercing 
than that of other men? Was he forced by the acuity of  his vision to look through the veils of prejudice and 
superstition to the hideous reality behind them? We may doubt it. The real reason w hy the Marquis could see no 
meaning or value in the world is to be found in those de scriptions of fornications, sodomies and tortures which 
alternate with the philosophizings of Justine and Juliette. In the ordinary circumstances of life, the Marquis was not 
particularly cruel; indeed, he is said to have got into serious trouble during the Terror for his leniency toward those 
suspected of anti-revolutionary sentiments. His was a st rictly sexual perversion. It was for flogging actresses, 
sticking pen-knives into shop girls, feeding prostitutes on sugar-plums impregnated with  cantharides, that he got

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

188
into trouble with the police. His philosophical disquisitions, which, like the pornographic day-dreams, were mostly 
written in prisons and asylums, were th e theoretical justification of his erotic  practices. Similarly his politics were 
dictated by the desire to avenge hi mself on those members of his family and his class who had, as he thought, 
unjustly persecuted him. He was enthusiast ically a revolutionary -- at any rate in  theory; for, as we have seen, he 
was too gentle in practice to satisfy his fellow Jacobins. His books are of permanent interest and value because they 
contain a kind of reductio ad absurdum of revolutionary theory. Sade is not afraid to be a revolutionary to the bitter 
end. Not content with denying the particular system of values embodied in the ancien régime, he proceeds to deny 
the existence of any values, any idealism, any binding moral imperatives whatsoever. He preaches violent 
revolution not only in the field of polit ics and economics, but (logical with th e appalling logicality of the maniac) 
also on that of personal relations, incl uding the most intimate of all, the rela tions between lovers. And, after all, 
why not? If it is legitimate to torment and kill in one set of circumstances, it must be equally legitimate to torment 
and kill in all other circumst ances. De Sade is the one completely consistent and thorough-going revolutionary of 
history. 
 If I have lingered so long over a maniac, it is be cause his madness illuminates the dark places of normal 
behavior. No philosophy is completely disinterested. The pure  love of truth is always mingled to some extent with 
the need, consciously or unconsciously fe lt by even the noblest and the most in telligent philosophers, to justify a 
given form of personal or social beha vior, to rationalize the traditional prej udices of a given class or community. 
The philosopher who finds meaning in the world is concerned, not only to elucidate that meaning, but also to prove 
that it is most clearly expressed in some established religion, some accepted code of morals. The philosopher who 
finds no meaning in the world is not concerned exclusively with a problem  in pure metaphysics. He is also 
concerned to prove that there is no va lid reason why he personally should not do as he wants to do, or why his 
friends should not seize political power and govern in the way that they find most advantageous to themselves. The 
voluntary, as opposed to the intellectual, reasons for holdi ng the doctrines of materialism, for example, may be 
predominantly erotic, as they were in the case of Lamettrie (see his lyrical account of the pleasures of the bed in La 
Volupté and at the end of L'Homme Machine), or predominantly political, as they  were in the case of Karl Marx. 
The desire to justify a particular form of political orga nization and, in some cases, of  a personal will to power has 
played an equally large part in the formulation of philos ophies postulating the existence of a meaning in the world. 
Christian philosophers have found no difficulty in justifyi ng imperialism, war, the capit alistic system, the use of 
torture, the censorship of the press, and ecclesiastical ty rannies of every sort from the tyranny of Rome to the 
tyrannies of Geneva and New England. In  all these cases they have shown that the me aning of the world was such 
as to be compatible with, or actually most completely  expressed by, the iniquities I have mentioned above -- 
iniquities which happened, of course, to serve the personal or sectarian interests of th e philosophers concerned. In 
due course, there arose philosophers w ho denied not only the right of these Christian special pl eaders to justify 
iniquity by an appeal to the meaning of the world, but even  their right to find any such meaning whatsoever. In the 
circumstances, the fact was not surprising. One unscrupul ous distortion of the truth tends to beget other and 
opposite distortions. Passions may be satis fied in the process; but the disint erested love of knowledge suffers 
eclipse. 
 For myself as, no doubt, for most of my contemporari es, the philosophy of meaninglessness was essentially 
an instrument of liberation. The liberation we desired wa s simultaneously liberation from a certain political and 
economic system and liberation from a certain system of morality. We objected to the morality because it 
interfered with our sexual freedom; we objected to th e political and economic system because it was unjust. The 
supporters of these systems claimed th at in some way they embodied the meaning (a Christian meaning, they 
insisted) of the world. There was one admirably simple method of confuting these pe ople and at the same time 
justifying ourselves in our pol itical and erotic revolt: we  could deny that the world had any meaning whatsoever. 
Similar tactics had been adopted during the eighteent h century and for the same  reasons. From the popular 
novelists of the period, such as Crébillon and Andréa de  Nerciat, we learn that the chief reason for being 
"philosophical" was that one might be free from prejudices -- above all prej udices of a sexual nature. More serious 
writers associated political with sexual prejudice and recommended philos ophy (in practice, the philosophy of 
meaninglessness) as a preparation for social reform or revolution. The early nine teenth centur y witnessed a 
reaction toward meaningful philosophy of a kind that could, unhappily, be used  to justify polit ical reaction. The 
men of the new Enlightenment, which occurred in the middle years of the nineteenth century, once again used

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

189
meaninglessness as a weapon against th e reactionaries. The Vict orian passion for respectab ility was, however, so 
great that, during the period when they were formulat ed, neither Positivism nor Darwinism was used as a 
justification for sexual indulgence. After the War the philosophy of meaninglessness came once more triumphantly 
into fashion. As in the days of Lamettrie and his successors  the desire to justify a certain sexual looseness played a 
part in the popularization of meaninglessness at least as important as th at played by the desire for liberation from 
an unjust and inefficient form of soci al organization. By the end of the twenties a reaction had begun to set in -- 
away from the easy-going philosophy of general meaningl essness toward the hard, ferocious theologies of 
nationalistic and revolu tionary idolatry. Meaning was reintroduced in to the world, but on ly in patches. The 
universe as a whole still remained meani ngless, but certain of its parts, such as the nation, the state, the class, the 
party, were endowed with significance and the highest value. The general ac ceptance of a doctrine that denies 
meaning and value to the world as a whole, while assigning them in a supreme degree to certain arbitrarily selected 
parts of the totality, can have only evil and disastrous results . "All that we are (and consequently all that we do) is 
the result of what we have thought. " We have thought of ourselves as me mbers of supremely meaningful and 
valuable communities -- deified nations, divine classes and what not -- existing within a meaningless universe. And 
because we have thought like this, rearmament is in full swing, economic nationalism becomes ever more intense, 
the battle of rival propagandas grows ever fiercer, and general war becomes increasingly more probable. 
 It was the manifestly poisonous nature of the fruits that forced me to reconsider the philosophical tree on 
which they had grown. It is certainly  hard, perhaps impossible, to demons trate any necessary connection between 
truth and practical goodness. Indeed it was fashionable dur ing the Enlightenment of th e middle nineteenth century 
to speak of the need for supplying the masses with "vital lies" calculated to make t hose who accepted them not 
only happy, but well behaved. The truth -- which was that there was no m eaning or value in the world -- should be 
revealed only to the few who were strong enough to stomach it. Now, it may be, of course, that the nature of things 
has fixed a great gulf between trut h about the world on the one hand and practical goodness on the other. 
Meanwhile, however, the nature of things seems to have  so constituted the human mind that it is extremely 
reluctant to accept such a conclusion, except under the pressure of desire or self-interest. Furthermore those who, to 
be liberated from political or sexual re straint, accept the doctrine of absolute meaninglessness tend in a short time 
to become so much dissatisfied with their philosophy (in sp ite of the services it renders)  that they will exchange it 
for any dogma, however manifestly nonsen sical, which restores meaning if onl y to a part of the universe. Some 
people, it is true, can live contentedly with a philosophy of meaninglessness for a very long time. But in most cases 
it will be found that these people possess some talent or accomplishment that permits them to live a life which, to a 
limited extent, is profoundly meaningful and valuable. Thus an artist, or a man of science can profess a philosophy 
of general meaninglessness and yet lead a perfectly conten ted life. The reason for this must be sought in the fact 
that artistic creation and scientific research are absorbingly delightful oc cupations, possessing, moreover, a certain 
special significance in virtue of their relation to trut h and beauty. Nevertheless, artistic creation and scientific 
research may be, and constantly are, used as devices for escaping from the responsibilities of life. They are 
proclaimed to be ends absolutely good in themselves -- e nds so admirable that those who pursue them are excused 
from bothering about anything else. This is particularly  true of contemporary science. The mass of accumulated 
knowledge is so great that it is now im possible for any individual to have a t horough grasp of more than one small 
field of study. Meanwhile, no attempt is made to produce a comprehensive synthesis of the general results of 
scientific research. Our universities possess no chair of synt hesis. All endowments, mo reover, go to special 
subjects -- and almost always to subjects which have no need of further endowment, such as physics, chemistry and 
mechanics. In our institutions of higher  learning about ten times as much is spent on the natural sciences as on the 
sciences of man. All our efforts ar e directed, as usual, to producing improved means to unimproved ends. 
Meanwhile intensive specialization te nds to reduce each branch of scien ce to a condition almost approaching 
meaninglessness. There are many men of science who are actually proud of this stat e of things. Specialized 
meaninglessness has come to be regarde d, in certain circles, as a kind of hall mark of true science. Those who 
attempt to relate the small particular results of specia lization with human life as a whole and its relation to the 
universe at large are accused of bei ng bad scientists, charlatans, self-adve rtisers. The people who make such 
accusations do so, of course, because they  do not wish to take any responsibil ity for anything, but merely to retire 
to their cloistered laboratories, and there amuse them selves by performing delightfu lly interesting researches. 
Science and art are only too often a s uperior kind of dope, possessing this advantage over booze and morphia: that

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

190
they can be indulged in with a good conscience and with the c onviction that, in the proc ess of indulging, one is 
leading the "higher life." Up to a point, of course, this is true. The life of the scientist or the artist is a higher life. 
Unfortunately, when led in an irresponsible, one-sided way, the higher life is probably more harmful for the 
individual than the lower life of the av erage sensual man and certainly, in the case of the scientist, much worse for 
society at large. . . 
 We are now at the point at which we discover that an obv iously untrue philosophy of life leads in practice 
to disastrous results; the point where we realize the necess ity of seeking an alternative philosophy that shall be true 
and therefore fruitful of good. A critical consideration of the classical argume nts in favor of theism would reveal 
that some carry no conviction whatever, wh ile the rest can only rais e a presumption in favor of the theory that the 
world possesses some integrating principl e that gives it significance and va lue. There is probably no argument by 
which the case for theism, or for deism, or for panthe ism in either its pancosmic or acosmic form, can be 
convincingly proved. The most that "abs tract reasoning" (to use Hume's phrase)  can do is to create a presumption 
in favor of one or other hypothesis; and this presumpti on can be increased by means of "experimental reasoning 
concerning matter of fact or evidence." Final conviction can only come to those who make an act of faith. The idea 
is one which most of us find very di stressing. But it may be doubted whethe r this particular act of faith is 
intrinsically more difficult than those which we have to  make, for example, every tune we frame a scientific 
hypothesis, every time that, from the consideration of a few phenomena, we  draw inference concerning all 
phenomena, past, present and future. On very little evid ence, but with no qualms of intellectual conscience, we 
assume that our craving for explanation has a real object in an explicable universe, that the aesthetic satisfaction we 
derive from certain arguments is a sign that they are true , that the laws of thought are also laws of things. There 
seems to be no reason why, having swallo wed this camel, we should not swallow an other, no larger really than the 
first. Once recognized, the reasons why we strain at the second camel cease to exist and we become free to 
consider on their merits the evidence and arguments that would reasonably justify us in making the final act of 
faith and assuming the truth of a hypothesis that we are unable fully to demonstrate. 
 "Abstract reasoning" must now gi ve place to "experimental reason ing concerning matter of fact or 
evidence." Natural science, as we ha ve seen, deals only with those aspects of reality that are amenable to 
mathematical treatment. The rest it merely ignores. But so me of the experiences thus i gnored by natural science -- 
aesthetic experiences, for example, a nd religious experiences -- throw much light upon the present problem. It is 
with the fact of such experiences and the evidence they furnish concerning the nature of the world that we have 
now to concern ourselves. 
 To discuss the nature and significa nce of aesthetic experience would take  too long. It is enough, in this 
place, merely to suggest that the best works of literary, plastic and musical art give us  more than mere pleasure; 
they furnish us with information about the nature of the world. The Sanctus in Beethoven's Mass in D, Seurat's 
Grande Jatte, Macbeth -- works such as these tell us, by strange but  certain implication, something significant 
about the ultimate reality behind appearances. Even from the perfection of minor masterpieces -- certain sonnets of 
Mallarmé, for instance, certain Chinese ceramics -- we can derive illuminating hints about the "something far more 
deeply interfused," about "the peace of God that passeth a ll understanding." But the subject of art is enormous and 
obscure, and my space is limited, I shall therefore confine myself to a discussion of cer tain religious experiences 
which bear more directly upon the present problem than do our experiences as creators and appreciators of art. 
 Meditation, in Babbitt's words, is a device for produc ing a "super-rational concen tration of the will." But 
meditation is more than a method of self-education; it has al so been used, in every part  of the world and from the 
remotest periods, as a method for ac quiring knowledge about the essentia l nature of things, a method for 
establishing communion between the soul and the integrating principle of the universe. Meditation, in other words, 
is the technique of mysticism. Prope rly practiced, with due pr eparation, physical, mental and moral, meditation 
may result in a state of what has been  called "transcendental c onsciousness" -- the direct intuition of, and union 
with, an ultimate spiritual reality that is perceived as simultaneously beyond the self and in some way within it. 
("God in the depths of us," says Ruysbroeck, "receives God who comes to us; it is God contemplating God.") Non-
mystics have denied the validity of th e mystical experience, describing it as merely subjective and illusory. But it 
should be remembered that to those who have never actua lly had it, any direct intuition must seem subjective and 
illusory. It is impossible for the deaf to form any idea of  the nature or significance of music. Nor is physical 
disability the only obstacle in the way of musical understanding. An Indian, for example, finds European orchestral

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

191
music intolerably noisy, complicated, over-intellectual, inhuman. It seems incredible to him that any one should be 
able to perceive beauty and meaning, to recognize an expression of the deep est and subtlest emotions in this 
elaborate cacophony. And yet, if he has patience and listens to enough of it, he will come at last to realize, not only 
theoretically but also by direct, immediate intuiti on, that this music possesses a ll the qualities which Europeans 
claim for it. Of the significant and pleasurable experiences of life only the simplest are open indiscriminately to all. 
The rest cannot be had except by those who have undergone a suitable training. One must be trained even to enjoy 
the pleasures of alcohol and tobacco; first whiskies seem  revolting, first pipes turn even the strongest of boyish 
stomachs. Similarly first Shakespeare sonnets seem mean ingless; first Bach fugues,  a bore; first differential 
equations, sheer torture. But training changes the nature of our spiritual experiences. In due course, contact with an 
obscurely beautiful poem, an elaborate piece of counterpoint or of mathematical reasoning, causes us to feel direct 
intuitions of beauty and significance. It is the same in the moral world. A man who has trained himself in goodness 
comes to have certain direct intuitio ns about character, about the relations between human beings, about his own 
position in the world -- intuitions that are quite diffe rent from the intuitions of the average sensual man. 
Knowledge is always a function of being. What we per ceive and understand depends upon what we are; and what 
we are depends partly on circumstances, partly, and more profoundly, on the nature of the efforts we have made to 
realize our ideal and the nature of the ideal we have tried to realize. The fact that knowing depends upon being 
leads, of course, to an immense amount of misunderstanding. The meaning of words, for example, changes 
profoundly according to the character and experiences of the user. Thus, to the saint, words like "love," "charity," 
"compassion" mean something quite different from what th ey mean to the ordinary man. Again, to the ordinary 
man, Spinoza's statement that "blessedness is not the reward of virtue, but is virtue its elf" seems simply untrue. 
Being virtuous is, for him, a most tedi ous and distressing process. But it is cl ear that to some one who has trained 
himself in goodness, virtue really is blessedness, while the life of the ordinary man, with its petty vices and its long 
spells of animal thoughtlessne ss and insentience, seems a real torture.  In view of the fact that knowing is 
conditioned by being and that being can be profoundly modified by training, we are justified in ignoring most of 
the arguments by which non-mystics have sought to discredi t the experience of mystics. The being of a color-blind 
man is such that he is not competen t to pass judgment on a painting. The co lor-blind man cannot be educated into 
seeing colors, and in this respect he is different fr om the Indian musician, who begins by finding European 
symphonies merely deafening and bewildering, but can be traine d, if he so desires, to perceive the beauties of this 
kind of music. Similarly, the being of a non-mystical pers on is such that he cannot understand the nature of the 
mystic's intuitions. Like the Indian musician, however, he is at liberty, if he so chooses, to have some kind of direct 
experience of what at present he does  not understand. This training is one wh ich he will certain ly find extremely 
tedious; for it involves, at first, the leading of a life of constant awareness and unr emitting moral effort; second, 
steady practice in the technique of meditation, which is probably about as difficult as the technique of violin 
playing. But, however tedious, the training can be undertaken by any one who wishes to do so. Those who have not 
undertaken the training can have no knowledge of the ki nd of experiences open to t hose who have undertaken it 
and are as little justified in denying the validity of those direct intuitions of an ultimate spiritual reality, at once 
transcendent and immanent, as were the Pisan professors who denied, on a priori grounds, the validity of Galileo's 
direct intuition (made possible by the telescope) of the fact that Jupiter has several moons. . . 
 Systematic training in recollection and meditation make s possible the mystical experience, which is a direct 
intuition of ultimate reality. At all times and in every pa rt of the world, mystics of the first order have always 
agreed that this ultimate reality, appr ehended in the process of meditation, is  essentially impersonal. This direct 
intuition of an impersonal spiritual reality, underlying all being, is in accord with the findings of the majority of the 
world's philosophers. 
 "There is," writes Professor Whitehead, in Religion in the Making, "a large concurrenc e in the negative 
doctrine that the religious experience does not include any direct intuition of a definite person, or individual. . . The 
evidence for the assertion of a genera l, though not universal, concurrence in the doctrine of no di rect vision of a 
personal God, can only be found by a consideration of the religious thought of the ci vilized world. . . Throughout 
India and China, religious thought, so fa r as it has been interpreted in preci se form, disclaims the intuition of 
ultimate personality substantial to the universe. This is true of Confucian philosophy, Buddhist philosophy and 
Hindu philosophy. There may be personal embodiments, but th e substratum is impersonal. Christian theology has 
also, in the main, adopted the position that there is no direct intuition of such a personal substratum for the world. It

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

192
maintains the doctrine of a personal God as a truth, but hol ds that our belief in it is based upon inference." There 
seems, however, to be no cogent reas on why, from the existing evidence, we should draw such an inference. 
Moreover, the practical results of drawing such an inference are good only up to a point; beyond that point they are 
very often extremely bad. 
 We are now in a position to draw a few tentative and fragmentary conclusions about the nature of the world 
and our relation to it and to one another. To the casual observer, the world seems to be made up of great numbers 
of independent existents, some of wh ich possess life and some consciousness.  From very early times philosophers 
suspected that this common-sense view was in part at leas t, illusory. More recently i nvestigators, trained in the 
discipline of mathematical physics a nd equipped with instruments of preci sion, have made observations from 
which it could be inferred that all th e apparently independent existents in the world were built up of a limited 
number of patterns of identi cal units of energy. An ulti mate physical identity underl ies the apparent physical 
diversity of the world. Moreover, all apparently independe nt existents are in fact interdependent. Meanwhile the 
mystics had shown that investigators, trained in the disc ipline of recollection and me ditation, could obtain direct 
experience of a spiritual unity  underlying the apparent dive rsity of independent consci ousness. They made it clear 
that what seemed to be the ultimate fact of personality wa s in reality not an ultimate fact and that it was possible 
for individuals to transcend the limitati ons of personality and to  merge their private consciousness into a greater, 
impersonal consciousness underlying the personal mind. . . 
 The physical world of our daily experience is a priv ate universe quarried out of a total reality which the 
physicists infer to be far greater than it. This private universe is different, not only from the real world, whose 
existence we are able to infer, even though we cannot di rectly apprehend it, but also  from the private universe 
inhabited by other animals -- universes which we can never penetrate, but concerning whose nature we can, as Von 
Uexkull has done, make interesting specu lative guesses. Each type of living creature inhabits a universe whose 
nature is determined and whose boundaries are imposed by the special inadequacies of  its sense organs and its 
intelligence. In man, intelligence has been so far developed th at he is able to infer the existence and even, to some 
extent, the nature of the real world out side his private universe. The nature of  the sense organs and intelligence of 
living beings is imposed by biological necessity or convenience. The instruments of knowledge are good enough to 
enable their owners to survive. Less inadequate inst ruments of knowledge might not only lead to no biological 
advantage but might actually constitute a biological handicap. Individual human beings have been able to transcend 
the limitations of man's private universe only to the exte nt that they are relieved from biological pressure. An 
individual is relieved from biological pr essure in two ways: from without, thanks  to the efforts of others, and from 
within, thanks to his own efforts. If he is to trans cend the limitations of  man's private universe he must be a 
member of a community which gives him protection against the inclemencies of the environment and makes it easy 
for him to supply his physical wants. But this is not en ough. He must also train hi mself in the art of being 
dispassionate and disinterested, must cu ltivate intellectual curiosity for its ow n sake and not for what he, as an 
animal, can get out of it. 
 The modern conception of man's in tellectual relationship to the unive rse was anticipated by the Buddhist 
doctrine that desire is the source of illusion. To the exte nt that it has overcome desire, a mind is free from illusion. 
This is true not only of the man of sc ience, but also of the ar tist and the philosopher. On ly the disinterested mind 
can transcend common-sense and pass beyond the boundaries of  animal or average-sensual human life. The mystic 
exhibits disinterestedness in the highest degree possible to human beings and is therefore able to transcend ordinary 
limitations more completely than the man of science, the artist or the philosopher. That which he discovers beyond 
the frontiers of the average sensual man's universe is a spiritual reality underlying and uniting all apparently 
separate existents -- a reality with  which he can merge himself and from which he can draw moral and even 
physical powers which, by ordinary standards, can only be described as super-normal. 
 The ultimate reality discoverable by  those who choose to modify their be ing, so that they can have direct 
knowledge of it, is not, as we have seen, a personality. Sin ce it is not personal, it is illegitimate to attribute to it 
ethical qualities. "God is not good," said Eckhart. "I am good." Goodne ss is the means by which men and women 
can overcome the illusion of being completely independent existents and can raise themselves to a level of being 
upon which it becomes possible, by recoll ection and meditation, to realize the fa ct of their oneness with ultimate 
reality, to know and in some measure actually associate themselves with it. The ultimate reality is "the peace of 
God which passeth all unders tanding"; goodness is the way by which it can be approached. "Finite beings," in the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

193
words of Royce, "are always such as they are in virtue of an inattention which at present blinds them to their actual 
relations to God and to one another." That inattention is the fruit, in Buddhist language, of desire. We fail to attend 
to our true relations with ultimate reality and, through ultimate reality, with our fellow beings, because we prefer to 
attend to our animal nature and to th e business of getting on in the world. Th at we can never completely ignore the 
animal in us or its biological needs is obvious. Our se parateness is not wholly an  illusion. The element of 
specificity in things is a brute fact  of experience. Diversity cannot be re duced to complete identity even in 
scientific and philos ophical theory, still less in lif e which is lived with bodies, that  is to say, w ith particular 
patternings of the ultimately identical units of energy. It is impossible in the nature of things, that no attention 
should be given to the animal in us; but in the circumstances  of civilized life, it is ce rtainly unnecessary to give all 
or most of our attention to it. G oodness is the method by which we divert  our attention from this singularly 
wearisome topic of our animality and our individual sepa rateness. Recollection and meditation assist goodness in 
two ways: by producing, in Babbitt's words, "a supra-rati onal concentration of will," and by making it possible for 
the mind to realize, not only theoretica lly, but also by direct in tuition, that the private universe of the average 
sensual man is not identical with the universe as a whole. Conversely, of cour se, goodness aids meditation by 
giving detachment from animality and so making it possible for the mind to pay attention to its actual relationship 
with ultimate reality and to other individuals. Goodness, meditation, the mys tical experience and the ultimate 
impersonal reality discovered in mystical experience are organically related. This f act disposes of the fears 
expressed by Dr. Albert Schweitzer in his recent book on Indian thought. Mysticism, he contends, is the correct 
world view; but, though correct, it is unsatisfactory in ethical content. The ultimate reality of the world is not moral 
("God is not good") and the mystic who unites himself with ultimate reality is uniting himself with a non-moral 
being, therefore is not himself moral. Bu t this is mere verbalism and ignores the actual facts of experience. It is 
impossible for the mystic to pay attenti on to his real relation to God and to his fellows, unless he has previously 
detached his attention from his animal nature and the bus iness of being socially suc cessful. But he cannot detach 
his attention from these things except by the consistent a nd conscious practice of the highest morality. God is not 
good; but if I want to have even the smallest knowledge of God, I must be good at least in some slight measure; 
and if I want as full a knowle dge of God as it is possible for human be ings to have, I must be as good as it is 
possible for human beings to be. Virtue is the essential prel iminary to the mystical experience. And this is not all. 
There is not even any theoretical incompatibility between an ultimate reality, which is impersonal and therefore not 
moral, and the existence of a moral order on the human level. Scientific investigation has shown that the world is a 
diversity underlain by an identity of physical substance; the mystical experi ence testifies to th e existence of a 
spiritual unity underlying the divers ity of separate consciousnesses. C oncerning the relation between the 
underlying physical unity and the underlying spiritual unity it is  hard to express an opini on. Nor is it necessary, in 
the present context, that we should expr ess one. For our present purposes the important fact is that it is possible to 
detect a physical and a spiritual unity underlying the inde pendent existents (to some extent merely apparent, to 
some extent real, at any rate for beings on our plan e of existence), of which our commonsense universe is 
composed. Now, it is a fact of experi ence that we can either emphasize our separateness from other beings and the 
ultimate reality of the world or emphasize our oneness with th em and it. To some extent at least, our will is free in 
this matter. Human beings are creatures who, in so far as they are animals and persons tend to regard themselves as 
independent existents, connected at mo st by purely biological ties, but who, in so far as they rise above animality 
and personality, are able to perceive that they are interrel ated parts of physical and spiritual wholes incomparably 
greater than themselves. For such beings the fundament al moral commandment is: You shall realize your unity 
with all being. But men cannot realize th eir unity with others and with ultimate reality unless they practice the 
virtue of love and understanding. L ove, compassion and understanding or in telligence -- these are the primary 
virtues in the ethical system, the virtues organically corr elated with what may be ca lled the scientific-mystical 
conception of the world. Ultimate realit y is impersonal and non-ethical; but if we would realize our  true relations 
with ultimate reality and our fellow be ings, we must practice morality an d (since no personality can learn to 
transcend itself unless it is reasonably free from external compulsion) respect the persona lity of others. Belief in a 
personal, moral God has led only too frequently to theoretical dogmatism and practical intolerance -- to a 
consistent refusal to respect personal ity and to the commission in the name of the divinely moral person of every 
kind of iniquity. 
 "The fact of the instability of evil," in Professor Wh itehead's words, "is the moral order of the world." Evil

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

194
is that which makes for separateness;  and that which makes for separatene ss is self-destructive. This self-
destruction of evil may be sudden and violent, as when murderous hatred results in a conflict that leads to the death 
of the hater; it may be gradual, as when a degenerative process results in impotence or extinction; or it may be 
reformative, as when a long course of evil-doing results in all concerned becoming so sick of destruction and 
degeneration that they decide to change their ways, thus transforming evil into good. 
 The evolutionary history of life clearly illustrates the instability of evil in the sense in which it has been 
defined above. Biological specialization may be regarded as  a tendency on the part of a species to insist on its 
separateness; and the result of specialization, as we have se en, is either negatively disast rous, in the sense that it 
precludes the possibility of further biological progress, or  positively disastrous, in the sense that it leads to the 
extinction of the species. In the same way intraspecifi c competition may be regarded as the expression of a 
tendency on the part of related indivi duals to insist on their separatene ss and independence; the effects of 
intraspecific competition are, as we have seen, almost wholly bad. Conversely, the qualities which have led to 
biological progress are the qualities which make it possible for individual beings to escape from their separateness 
-- intelligence and the te ndency to co-operate. Love and understanding are valuable even  on the biological level. 
Hatred, unawareness, stupidity and all that makes for increa se of separateness are the qua lities that, as a matter of 
historical fact, have led either to the extinction of a speci es, or to its becoming a living fossil, incapable of making 
further biological progress. 
(From "Beliefs," Ends and Means) 
 
 
 
Knowledge and Understanding 
 
 Knowledge is acquired when we succeed in fitting a new experience into the system of concepts based 
upon our old experiences. Understanding comes when we lib erate ourselves from the old and so make possible a 
direct, unmediated contact with the new, the mystery, moment by moment, of our existence. 
 The new is the given on every level of experience -- given perceptions, given emotions and thoughts, given 
states of unstructured awareness, given relationships with things and persons. The old is our home-made system of 
ideas and word patterns. It is the st ock of finished articles fabricated out of the given mystery by memory and 
analytical reasoning, by habit and the automatic associ ations of accepted notions. Knowledge is primarily a 
knowledge of these finished articles. Understanding is primarily direct awareness of the raw material. 
 Knowledge is always in terms of concepts and can  be passed on by means of words or other symbols. 
Understanding is not conceptual, and therefore cannot be passed on. It is an immediate experience, and immediate 
experience can only be talked about (ver y inadequately), never sh ared. Nobody can actually feel another's pain or 
grief, another's love or joy or hunger. And similarly nobody can experien ce another's understanding of a given 
event or situation. There can, of course, be knowledge of such an understanding, and this knowledge may be 
passed on in speech or writing, or by means of other symbols. Such communicable knowledge is useful as a 
reminder that there have been specifi c understandings in the past, and that understanding is at a ll times possible. 
But we must always remember that knowledge of understand ing is not the same thing as  the understanding, which 
is the raw material of that knowledge. It is as different from understanding as the doctor's prescription for penicillin 
is different from penicillin. 
 Understanding is not inherited, nor can it be laboriously acquired. It is something which, when 
circumstances are favorable, comes to us, so to say, of its own accord. All of us are knowers, all the time; it is only 
occasionally and in spite of ourselves that we directly understand the mystery of given reality. Consequently we are 
very seldom tempted to equate understanding with knowledge. Of the exceptional men and women, who have 
understanding in every situation, most are intelligent enough to see that understanding is different from knowledge 
and that conceptual systems based upon past experience are as necessary to the conduct of life as are spontaneous 
insights into new experiences. For these reasons the mist ake of identifying understanding with knowledge is rarely 
perpetrated and therefore poses no serious problem. 
 How different is the case with the opposite mistake, the mistake of supposing that knowledge is the same as 
understanding and interchangeab le with it! All adults possess vast stoc ks of knowledge. Some of it is correct

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

195
knowledge, some of it is inco rrect knowledge, and some of  it only looks like knowledge a nd is neither correct nor 
incorrect; it is merely meaningless. That which gives meaning to a proposition is not (to use the words of an 
eminent contemporary philosopher, Rudolf Carnap) "the a ttendant images or thoughts,  but the possibility of 
deducing from it perceptive propositions, in other words the possibility of verification. To give sense to a 
proposition, the presence of images is  not sufficient, it is not even necessary. We have no image of the electro-
magnetic field, nor even, I should say, of the gravitational field; nevert heless the proposition which physicists 
assert about these fields have a perfect sense, b ecause perceptive propositions are deductible from them." 
Metaphysical doctrines are propositions which cannot be ope rationally verified, at leas t on the level of ordinary 
experience. They may be expres sive of a state of mind, in the way that ly rical poetry is expres sive; but they have 
no assignable meaning. The information they convey is only pseudo-knowledge. But the formulators of 
metaphysical doctrines and the believer s in such doctrines have always mistaken this pseudo-knowledge for 
knowledge and have proceeded to modify their behavior  accordingly. Meaningless pseudo-knowledge has at all 
times been one of the principal motivat ors of individual and collective action. And that is one of the reasons why 
the course of human history has been so tragic and at the same time so  strangely grotesque . Action based upon 
meaningless pseudo-knowledge is always inappropriate, alwa ys beside the point, and c onsequently always results 
in the kind of mess mankind has always liv ed in -- the kind of mess that make s the angels weep and the satirists 
laugh aloud. 
 Correct or incorrect, relevant or meaningless, know ledge and pseudo-knowledge are as common as dirt and 
are therefore taken for granted. Understanding, on the contrary, is as rare, very nearly, as emeralds, and so is highly 
prized. The knowers would dearly love to be understanders; but either thei r stock of knowledge does not include 
the knowledge of what to do in order to be understanders; or else they know  theoretically what they ought to do, 
but go on doing the opposite all the same . In either case they cherish the comforting delusion that knowledge and, 
above all, pseudo-knowledge are understanding. Along with th e closely related errors of over-abstraction, over-
generalization and over-simplification, this is the commonest of all intellectual sins and the most dangerous. 
 Of the vast sum of human misery about one third, I would guess, is una voidable misery. Th is is the price 
we must pay for being embodied, and fo r inheriting genes which are subject to  deleterious mutations. This is the 
rent extorted by Nature for the privilege of living on the surface of a planet, whos e soil is mostly poor, whose 
climates are capricious and inclement, and whose inha bitants include a countless nu mber of micro-organisms 
capable of causing in man himself, in his domestic animals and cultivated plants, an immense variety of deadly or 
debilitating diseases. To these miseries  of cosmic origin must be added th e much larger group of those avoidable 
disasters we bring upon ourselves. For at least two thirds  of our miseries spring fr om human stupidity, human 
malice and those great motivators and justifiers of malice and stupidity, idealism, dogmatism and proselytizing zeal 
on behalf of religious or political idols. But zeal, dogmatism and idealis m exist only because we are forever 
committing intellectual sins. We sin by attributing concrete significance to meaningless pseudo-knowledge; we sin 
in being too lazy to thi nk in terms of multiple caus ation and indulging instead in over-simplification, over-
generalization and over-abstraction; a nd we sin by cherishing the false but agreeable notion that conceptual 
knowledge and, above all, conceptual pseudo-knowledge are the same as understanding. 
 Consider a few obvious examples. The atrocities of organized religion (and organized religion, let us never 
forget, has done about as much harm as it has done good) are all due, in the last analysis, to "mistaking the pointing 
finger for the moon" -- in other words to mistaking the ve rbalized notion for the given mystery to which it refers 
or, more often, only seems to refer. This, as I have said, is one  of the original sins of the intellect, and it is a sin in 
which, with a rationalistic bumptiousness as grotesque as it is distas teful, theologians have systematically 
wallowed. From indulgence in this kind of delinquency there has arisen, in most of the great religious traditions of 
the world, a fantastic over-valution of words. Over-valuati on of words leads all too frequently to the fabrication 
and idolatrous worship of dogmas, to the insistence on uniformity of belief, the demand for assent by all and 
sundry to a set of propositions which, though meaningless, are to be regarded as sacred. Those who do not consent 
to this idolatrous worship of words ar e to be "converted" and, if that should prove impossible, either persecuted or, 
if the dogmatizers lack polit ical power, ostracized and denounced. I mmediate experience of reality unites men. 
Conceptualized beliefs, including even the belief in a Go d of love and righteousness,  divide them and, as the 
dismal record of religious history bears witness, set them for centuries on end at each other's throats. 
 Over-simplification, over-generalizat ion and over-abstraction are three othe r sins closely re lated to the sin

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

196
of imagining that knowledge and pseudo-knowledge are the same as understanding. The over-generalizing over-
simplifier is the man who asse rts, without produci ng evidence, that "All X's are Y," or, "All A's have a single 
cause, which is B." The over-abstractor is the one who cannot  be bothered to deal with Jones and Smith, with Jane 
and Mary, as individuals, but enjoys being eloquent on the subject of Human ity, of Progress, of God and History 
and the Future. This brand of intell ectual delinquency is indulged in by every demagogue, every crusader. In the 
Middle Ages the favorite over-generalization was "All infidels are damned." (For the Moslems, "all infidels" meant 
"all Christians"; for the Christians, "all Moslems.") Almost as popular was the nonsensical proposition, "All 
heretics are inspired by the devil" and "All eccentric old women are witche s." In the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries the wars and pers ecutions were justifie d by the luminously clear and simp le belief that "All Roman 
Catholics (or, if you happened to be on the Pope's side , all Lutherans, Calvinists  and Anglicans) are God's 
enemies." In our own day Hitler proclaimed that all the ills  of the world had one cause, namely Jews, and that all 
Jews were subhuman enemies of mankind. For the Communists, all the ills of  the world have one cause, namely 
capitalists, and all capitalists and their middle-class s upporters are subhuman enemies of mankind. It is perfectly 
obvious, on the face of it, that none of  these over-generalized statements can  possibly be true. But the urge to 
intellectual sin is fearfully strong. All are subject to temptation and few are able to resist. 
 There are in the lives of human beings very many  situations in which only knowledge, conceptualized, 
accumulated and passed on by means of word s, if of any practical use. For example, if I want to manufacture 
sulphuric acid or to keep accounts for a banker, I do not start at the beginnings of chemistry or economics; I start at 
what is now the end of these sciences. In other words, I go to a school wher e the relevant knowledge is taught, I 
read books in which the accumulations of past experience in these particular fields are se t forth. I can learn the 
functions of an accountant or a chemi cal engineer on the basis of knowledge al one. For this particular purpose it is 
not necessary for me to have much understanding of concre te situations as they arise, moment by moment, from 
the depths of the given mystery of our existence. What is important for me as a professional man is that I should be 
familiar with all the conceptual knowledge in my field. Ours  is an industrial civiliza tion, in which no society can 
prosper unless it possesses an elite of  highly trained scientists and a c onsiderable army of engineers and 
technicians. The possession and wide dissemination of a great deal of correct, specialized knowledge has become a 
prime condition of national survival. In the United States, du ring the last twenty or thirty  years, this fact seems to 
have been forgotten. Professional educationists have ta ken John Dewey's theories of  "learning through doing" and 
of "education as life-ad justment," and have applied them in such a way that, in many American schools, there is 
now doing without learning, along with cour ses in adjustment to everything except the basic twentieth-century fact 
that we live in a world wher e ignorance of science and its methods is the surest, shortest road to national disaster. 
During the past half centur y every other nation has made great effort s to impart more knowledge to more young 
people. In the United States professiona l educationists have chosen  the opposite course. At the turn of the century 
fifty-six per cent of the pupils in Amer ican high schools studied algebra; today less than a quarter of them are so 
much as introduced to the subject. In 1955 eleven per cen t of American boys and girl s were studying geometry; 
fifty years ago the figure was twenty-s even per cent. Four per cen t of them now take physics, as against nineteen 
per cent in 1900. Fifty per cent of American high schools o ffer no courses in chemistry, fifty-three per cent no 
course in physics. This headlong decline in  knowledge has not been accomp anied by any increase in 
understanding; for it goes without sa ying that high school courses in life adjustment do not teach understanding. 
They teach only conformity to current conventions of pe rsonal and collective behavior. There is no substitute for 
correct knowledge, and in the process of acquiring correct  knowledge there is no substitu te for concentration and 
prolonged practice. Except for the unus ually gifted, learning, by whatever method, must always be hard work. 
Unfortunately there are many professiona l educationists who seem to think th at children should never be required 
to work hard. Wherever educational methods are based on this assumption, children will not in fact acquire much 
knowledge; and if the methods are followed for a generati on or two, the society which tolerates them will find 
itself in full decline. 
 In theory, deficiencies in knowledge can be made good simply by changing the cu rriculum. In practice, a 
change in the curriculum will do little good, unless there is a corresponding change in the point of view of 
professional educationists. For the troubl e with American educationists, writ es a distinguished member of their 
profession, Dr. H. L. Dodge, is that they "regard any subject from pers onal grooming to philosophy as equally 
important or interchangeable in furthering the process of self-realization. This anarchy of values has led to the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

197
displacement of the established disciplines of scienc e and the humanities by these new subjects." Whether 
professional educationists can be induced to change their current attitudes is uncertain. Should it prove impossible, 
we must fall back on the comforting thought that time  never stands still and that nobody is immortal. What 
persuasion and the threat of national decline fail to accomplish, retirement,  high blood pressure and death will 
bring to pass, more slowly, it is true, but much more surely. 
 The dissemination of correct knowledge is one of the e ssential functions of educa tion, and we neglect it at 
our peril. But, obviously, education should be more than  a device for passing on correct knowledge. It should also 
teach what Dewey called life adjustme nt and self-realization. But precisel y how should self-re alization and life 
adjustment be promoted? To this question modern educ ators have given many answers. Most of these answers 
belong to one or other of two main educational familie s, the Progressive and the Classical. Answers of the 
Progressive type find expression in the provision of courses in such subject as "family living, consumer economics, 
job information, physical and mental h ealth, training for world citizenship a nd statesmanship and last, and we are 
afraid least" (I quote ag ain the words of Dr. Dodge) "training in f undamentals." Where answers of the Classical 
type are preferred, educators provide courses in Latin, Greek  and modern European literature, in world history and 
in philosophy -- exclusively, for some odd reason, of th e Western brand. Shakespear e and Chaucer, Virgil and 
Homer -- how far away they seem, how irrevocably dead! Why, then, should we bother to teach the classics? The 
reasons have been stated a thousand times, but seldom with more force and lucidity than by Albert Jay Nock in his 
Memoirs of a Superfluous Man. "The literatures of Greece and Rome provi de the longest, the most complete and 
most nearly continuous record we have of what the stra nge creature Homo sapiens has been busy about in virtually 
every department of spiritual, intellectual and social ac tivity. Hence the mind that has canvassed this record is 
much more than a disciplined mind; it  is an experienced mind. It has come, as Emerson says, into a feeling of 
immense longevity, and it inst inctively views contemporary man and his doings in the perspe ctive set by this 
profound and weighty experience. Our studi es were properly called formative,  because, beyond all others, their 
effect was powerfully maturing. Cicero  told the unvarnished truth in saying that those who ha ve no knowledge of 
what has gone before them must for ever remain children. And if one wished to characterize the collective mind of 
this period, or indeed of any period, th e use it makes of its powers of observ ation, reflection, logical inference, one 
would best do it by the word 'immaturity.' " 
 The Progressive and the Classical approaches to educa tion are not incompatible. It  is perfectly possible to 
combine a schooling in the local cultural tradition with a training, half vocational, half psychological, in adaptation 
to the current conventions of social lif e, and then to combine this combination with training in the sciences, in 
other words with the inculcation of correct knowledge. But is this enough? Can such an education result in the self-
realization which is its aim? The question deserves  our closest scrutiny. Nobody, of course, can doubt the 
importance of accumulated experience as a guide for indivi dual and social conduct. We are human because, at a 
very early stage in the history of the species, our ances tors discovered a way of pr eserving and disseminating the 
results of experience. They learned to speak and were thus  enabled to translate what they had perceived, what they 
had inferred from given fact and home-grown phantasy, in to a set of concepts, which could be added to by each 
generation and bequeathed, a treasure of mingled sense and nonsense, to posterity. In Mr. Nock's words "the mind 
that has canvassed this record  is an experienced mind." The only trouble, so far as we are concerned, is that the 
vicarious experience derived from a study of  the classics is, in certain respects,  completely irrelevant to twentieth-
century facts. In many ways, of course, the modern world resembles the world inhabited by the men of antiquity. In 
many other ways, however, it is radically different. For example, in their world the rate of change was exceedingly 
slow; in ours advancing technology produces a state of chronic revolution. They took infanticide for granted 
(Thebes was the only Greek city which forbade the exposure of babies) and regarded slavery as not only necessary 
to the Greek way of life, but as intrinsically natural and right; we are the heirs of eighteenth- and nineteenth-
century humanitarianism and must solve our economic and demographic proble ms by methods less dreadfully 
reminiscent of recent totalitarian practice. Because all the dirty work was done by slaves, they regarded every form 
of manual activity as essentially unwo rthy of a gentleman and in consequen ce never subjected their over-abstract, 
over-rational theories to the test of experiment; we have learned, or at least are learning, to think operationally. 
They despised "barbarians," never bothered to learn a foreign language and coul d therefore naïvely regard the rules 
of Greek grammar and syntax as the Laws of Thought; we have begun to understand th e nature of language, the 
danger of taking words too seriously, the ev er-present need for linguistic analysis. They knew nothing about the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

198
past and therefore, in Cicero's words, were like children. (Thucydides, the grea test historian of antiquity, prefaces 
his account of the Peloponnesian War by airily asserting that nothing of great  importance had happened before his 
own time.) We, in the course of th e last five generations, ha ve acquired a knowledge of ma n's past extending back 
to more than half a million years and covering the act ivities of tribes and nations in every continent. They 
developed political institutions which, in the case of Greece, were hopelessly unstable and, in the case of Rome, 
were only too firmly fixed in a pattern of aggressiveness and brutality; but what we need is a few hints on the art of 
creating an entirely new kind of society, durable but adventurous, strong but humane, highly organized but liberty-
loving, elastic and adaptable. In this matter Greece and Ro me can teach us only negatively -- by demonstrating, in 
their divergent ways, what not to do. 
 From all this it is clear that a classical education in the humanities of two thousand years ago requires to be 
supplemented by some kind of training in the humanities of  today and tomorrow. The Pr ogressives profess to give 
such a training; but surely we need something a little more  informative, a little more useful in this vertiginously 
changing world of ours, than courses in present-day cons umer economics and current job information. But even if 
a completely adequate schooling in the humanities of the past, the present and the foreseeable future could be 
devised and made available to all, would the aims of educat ion, as distinct from factual and theoretical instruction, 
be thereby achieved? Would the recipients  of such an education be any nearer  to the goal of self-realization? The 
answer, I am afraid, is, No. For at this point we find our selves confronted by one of those paradoxes which are of 
the very essence of our strange exis tence as amphibians inhabiting, without being completely at home in, half a 
dozen almost incommensurable worlds -- the world of conc epts and the world of data, the objective world and the 
subjective, the small, bright world of personal consciousness and the vast , mysterious world of the unconscious. 
Where education is concerned, the paradox may be expressed in the statement that the medium of education, which 
is language, is absolutely necessary, but also fatal; that the subject matter of education, which is the conceptualized 
accumulation of past experiences, is indispensable, but also an obstacle to be circumvented. "Existence is prior to 
essence." Unlike most metaphysical proposi tions, this slogan of th e existentialists can actua lly be verified. "Wolf 
children," adopted by animal mothers a nd brought up in animal surroundings, ha ve the form of human beings, but 
are not human. The essence of humanity, it is evident, is not something we are born with; it is something we make 
or grow into. We learn to speak, we  accumulate conceptualized knowledge and pseudo-knowledge, we imitate our 
elders, we build up fixed patterns of  thought and feeling and behavior, and in the process we become human, we 
turn into persons. But the things which make us human are precisely the things which interfere with self-realization 
and prevent understanding. We are humanized by imitating others, by learning their speech and by acquiring the 
accumulated knowledge which language makes available. But we understand only when, by liberating ourselves 
from the tyranny of words, conditioned reflexes and soci al conventions, we establish direct, unmediated contact 
with experience. The greatest paradox of  our existence consists in this: that, in order to understand, we must first 
encumber ourselves with all the inte llectual and emotional baggage which is an impediment to understanding. 
Except in a dim, pre-conscious way, animals do not unders tand a situation, even though, by inherited instinct or by 
an ad hoc act of intelligence, they may be reacting to it with complete appropriateness, as though they understood 
it. Conscious understanding is  the privilege of men and women, and it is a privilege which they have earned, 
strangely enough, by acquiring the useful or delinquent habits, the stereotype s of perception, thought and feeling, 
the rituals of behavior, the stock of second-hand knowledge and pseudo-knowledge, whose possession is the 
greatest obstacle to understan ding. "Learning," says Lao-tsu, "consists in adding to one's stock day by day. The 
practice of the Tao consists in subtr acting." This does not mean, of course, that we can live by  subtraction alone. 
Learning is as necessary as unlearning. Wherever technical proficiency is  needed, learning is indispensable. From 
youth to old age, from generation to generation, we must  go on adding to our stock of useful and relevant 
knowledge. Only in this way can we hope to deal effectivel y with the physical environment, and with the abstract 
ideas which make it possible for men to find their way through the complexities of civilization and technology. But 
this is not the right way to deal with our personal reactions to ourselves or to other human beings. In such situations 
there must be an unlearning of accumulated concepts; we must respond to each new challenge not with our old 
conditioning, not in the light of conceptual knowledge ba sed on the memory of past and different events, not by 
consulting the law of averages, but with a consciousness stripped naked and as though newborn. Once more we are 
confronted by the great paradox of human  life. It is our conditioning which develops our consciousness; but in 
order to make full use of this developed consciousness,  we must start by getting rid of the conditioning which

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

199
developed it. By adding conceptual knowledge to c onceptual knowledge, we make  conscious understanding 
possible; but this potential understanding can be actualized only when we have subtracted all that we have added. 
 It is because we have memories that we are convinced  of our self-identity as pe rsons and as members of a 
given society. 
 
 The child is father of the Man;  
 And I could wish my days to be  
 Bound each to each by natural piety.  
 
What Wordsworth called "natural piet y" a teacher of understanding would desc ribe as indulgence in emotionally 
charged memories, associated with childhood and youth. Fact ual memory -- the memory, for example, of the best 
way of making sulphuric acid or of ca sting up accounts -- is an unmixed bl essing. But psychological memory (to 
use Krishnamurti's term), memory carrying an emotional ch arge, whether positive or nega tive, is a source at the 
worst of neurosis and insanity (psychiatry is largely th e art of ridding patients of the incubus of their negatively 
charged memories), at the best of di stractions from the task of understandi ng -- distractions which, though socially 
useful, are none the less obstacles to be climbed over or avoided. Emotionally charged memories cement the ties of 
family life (or sometimes make family life impossible!) and serve, when conceptualized and taught as a cultural 
tradition, to hold communities together. On the level of understanding, on the level of charity and on the level, to 
some extent, of artistic expression, an individual has it in his power to transcend his social tradition, to overstep the 
bounds of the culture in which he has been brought up. On  the level of knowledge, manners and custom, he can 
never get very far away from the persona created for him by his family and hi s society. The culture within which 
he lives is a prison -- but a prison which makes it possibl e for any prisoner who so desires to achieve freedom, a 
prison to which, for this and a host of other reasons, its inmates owe an enormous debt of gratitude and loyalty. But 
though it is our duty to "honor our father and our mother," it is also our duty "to hate our father and our mother, our 
brethren and our sisters, yea and our own life" -- that so cially conditioned life we take for gr anted. Though it is 
necessary for us to add to our cultural stock day by day, it is also necessary to subtract and subtract. There is, to 
quote the title of Simone Weil's posthumous essay, a great "N eed for Roots"; but there is  an equally urgent need, 
on occasion, for total rootlessness. 
 In our present context this book by Simone Weil and the preface which Mr . T. S. Eliot contributes to the 
English edition are particularly instructive. Simone Weil was a woman of great ability, heroic virtue and boundless 
spiritual aspiration. But unfortunately for herself, as well as for her readers,  she was weighed down by a burden of 
knowledge and pseudo-knowledge, which her own almost ma niacal over-valuation of words and notions rendered 
intolerably heavy. A clerical friend reports of her that he did not "ever remember Simone Weil, in spite of her 
virtuous desire for objectivity, give way in the course of a discussion." She was so deeply rooted in her culture that 
she came to believe that words were supremely importa nt. Hence her love of argum ent and the obstinacy with 
which she clung to her opinions. Hence too her strange inab ility, on so many occasions, to distinguish the pointing 
finger from the indicated moon. "But why do you prate of God?" Meister Eckhart asked; and out of the depth of his 
understanding of given reality, he added "Whatever you say of Him is untrue." Necessarily so; for "the saving truth 
was never preached by the Buddha," or by anyone else. 
 Truth can be defined in many ways. But if you define it as understanding (and this is how all the masters of 
the spiritual life have defined it), then it is clear that "truth must be lived  and there is nothing to argue about in this 
teaching; any arguing is sure to go against the inte nt of it." This was something which Emerson knew and 
consistently acted upon. To the almost frenzied exaspera tion of that pugnacious manipul ator of religious notions, 
the elder Henry James, he refused to argue about anythi ng. And the same was true of William Law. "Away, then, 
with the fiction and workings of disc ursive reason, either for or against Ch ristianity! They are only the wanton 
spirit of the mind, whilst ignorant of God and insensible of its own nature and condition. . . For neither God, nor 
heaven, nor hell, nor the devil, nor the flesh, can be any other way knowable in you or by you, but by their own 
existence and manifestation in you. And any pretended knowledge of any of t hose things, beyond and without this 
self-evident sensibility of their birth within you, is only such knowledge of them  as the blind man hath of the light 
that has never entered into him." This does not mean, of course, that discursive reas on and argument are without 
value. Where knowledge is concerned, they are not only valuable; they are indispensable. But knowledge is not the 
same thing as understanding. If we want to understand, we must uproot ourselves from our culture, by-pass

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

200
language, get rid of emotionally charged memories, hate ou r fathers and mothers, subtra ct and subtract from our 
stock of notions. "Needs must it be a vi rgin," writes Meister Eckhart, "by whom Jesus is received. Virgin, in other 
words, is a person, void of alien images, free as he was when he existed not." 
 Simone Weil must have known, theoretically, about this  need for cultural virginit y, of total rootlessness. 
But, alas, she was too deeply embedded in her own and ot her people's ideas, too supers titious a believer in the 
magic of the words she handled with so much skill, to be  able to act upon this knowledge. "The food," she wrote, 
"that a collectivity supplies to those w ho form part of it has no equivalent in the universe." (Thank God! we may 
add, after sniffing the spiritual nourishment provided by  many of the vanished colle ctivities of the past.) 
Furthermore, the food provided by a collec tivity is food "not only for the souls of the living, but also for souls yet 
unborn." Finally, "the collectivity constitutes the sole agen cy for preserving the spiritual treasures accumulated by 
the dead, the sole transmitting agency by means of which the dead can speak to the living. And the sole earthly 
reality which is connected with the et ernal destiny of man is the irradiati ng light of those who have managed to 
become fully conscious of this destiny, transmitted from generation to generation." This  last sentence could only 
have been penned by one who systematically mist ook knowledge for understanding, home-made concepts for 
given reality. It is, of course, desirable that there should be knowledge of what men now dead have said about their 
understanding of reality. But to maintain that a knowledge  of other people's understanding is the same, for us, as 
understanding, or can even directly l ead us to understanding, is a mistake against which all the masters of the 
spiritual life have always warned us. The letter in St. Paul's phrase, is full of "o ldness." It has therefore no 
relevance to the ever novel reality, which can be understood only in the "newness of the spirit." As for the dead, let 
them bury their dead. For even the most exalted of past  seers and avatars "never taught the saving truth." We 
should not, it goes without saying, neglect the records of dead men's understandings. On the contrary, we ought to 
know all about them. But we must know all about them without taking them too seriously. We must know all about 
them, while remaining acutely aware th at such knowledge is not the same as understanding and that understanding 
will come to us only when we have subtracted what we know  and made ourselves void and virgin, free as we were 
when we were not. 
 Turning from the body of the book to the preface, we fi nd an even more striking example of that literally 
preposterous over-valuation of words and notions to which the cultured and the learned ar e so fatally prone. "I do 
not know," Mr. Eliot writes, "whether she [Simone Weil] could read the Upan ishads in Sanskrit -- or, if so, how 
great was her mastery of what is not  only a highly developed language, but a way of thought, the difficulties of 
which become more formidable to a European student the mo re diligently he applies himself to it." But like all the 
other great works of Oriental philosophy, the Upanishads are not systems of pure speculation, in which the niceties 
of language are all important. They were written by Tr anscendental Pragmatists, as we may call them, whose 
concern was to teach a doctrine which could be made  to "work," a metaphysical theory which could be 
operationally tested, not through perception only, but by a dir ect experience of the whole man on every level of his 
being. To understand the meaning of tat tvam asi, "thou art That," it is not nece ssary to be a profound Sanskrit 
scholar. (Similarly, it is not necessary to be a profound Hebrew scholar in order to understand the meaning of "thou 
shalt not kill.") Understanding of th e doctrine (as opposed to conceptualiz ed knowledge about the doctrine) will 
come only to those who choose to perform the operations that permit tat tvam asi to become a given fact of direct, 
unmediated experience, or in Law's wo rds "a self-evident sensib ility of its birth within them." Did Simone Weil 
know Sanskrit, or didn't she? The question is entirely beside the point -- is ju st a particularly smelly cultural red 
herring dragged across the trail that leads from selfhood to more-than-selfhood, from notionally conditioned ego to 
unconditioned spirit. In relation to the Upanishads or any other work of Hindu or Buddhist philosophy, only one 
question deserves to be taken with complete seri ousness. It is this. How can a form of words, tat tvam asi, a 
metaphysical proposition such as Nirvana and samsara are one, be converted into the direct, unmediated 
experience of a given fact? How can language and the learned f oolery of scholars (for, in this vital context, that is 
all it is) be circumvented, so that th e individual soul may finally understand the That which, in spite of all its 
efforts to deny the primordial fact, is identical with the thou? Specifically, what methods should we follow? Those 
inculcated by Patanjali, or those of the Hinayana monks? Those of the Ta ntriks of northern India and Tibet, those 
of the Far Eastern Taoists, of the followers of Zen? T hose described by St. John of the Cross and the author of The 
Cloud of Unknowing? If the European student wishes to remain shut up in the prison created by his private 
cravings and the thought patterns inherited from hi s predecessors, then by all means let him plunge, through

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

201
Sanskrit, or Pali, or Chinese, or Tibetan, into the verb al study of "a way of thought , the difficulties of which 
become more formidable the more diligently he applies hims elf to it." If, on the other hand, he wishes to transcend 
himself by actually understanding the pr imordial fact described or hinted at in the Upanishads and the other 
scriptures of what, for lack of  a better phrase, we will call  "spiritual religion," then he must ignore the problems of 
language and speculative philosophy, or at least relegate them to a secondary position, and concentrate his attention 
on the practical means whereby the advance from knowledge to understanding may best be made. 
 From the positively charged collective memories, which are organized into a cultural or religious tradition, 
let us now return to the positively charged private memories , which individuals organize into a system of "natural 
piety." We have no more right to wallow in natural piety --  that is to say, in emotionally charged memories of past 
happiness and vanished loves -- than to bemoan earlier miseries and torment ourselves with remorse for old 
offenses. And we have no more right to waste the presen t instant in relishing future  and entirely  hypothetical 
pleasures than to waste it in the appr ehension of possible disasters to come. "T here is no greater pain," says Dante, 
"than, in misery, to remember happy times." "Then st op remembering happy times and accept the fact of your 
present misery," would be the seemingly unsympathetic  answer to all those who have had understanding. The 
emptying of memory is classed by St. John of the Cross as a good second only to the st ate of union with God, and 
an indispensable condition of such union. 
 The word Buddha may be translated as "awakened." Those w ho merely know about things, or only think 
they know, live in a state of self-conditioned and cultu rally conditioned somnambulism. Those who understand 
given reality as it presents itself, mo ment by moment, are wide awake. Memory  charged with pleasant emotions is 
a soporific or, more accurately, an inducer of trance. This was discovered empirically by an American hypnotist, 
Dr. W. B. Fahnestock, whose books Statuvolism, or Arti ficial Somnambulism, was published in 1871. "When 
persons are desirous of entering into this state [of artificial somnambulism] I place them in a chair, where they may 
be at perfect ease. They are next instructed to throw their minds to some familiar place it matters not where, so that 
they have been there before and seem  desirous of going there ag ain, even in thought. When  they have thrown the 
mind to the place, or upon the desired object, I endeavor by speaking to them frequently to keep their mind upon it. 
. . This must be persisted in for some time." In th e end, "clairvoyancy will be  induced." Anyone who has 
experimented with hypnosis, or who has watched an expe rienced operator inducing tran ce in a difficult subject, 
knows how effective Fahnestock's method can be. Incident ally, the relaxing power of positively charged memory 
was rediscovered, in another medical context, by an oculist,  Dr. W. H. Bates, who used to make his patients cover 
their eyes and revisit in memory the scenes of their happiest experiences. By this means muscular and mental 
tensions were reduced and it became possible for the patients to use their eyes and minds in a relaxed and therefore 
efficient way. From all this it is clear that, while positiv ely charged memories can and should be used for specific 
therapeutic purposes, there must be no indiscriminate indulgence in "natural piety"; for such indulgence may result 
in a condition akin to trance -- a co ndition at the opposite pole from the wakefulness that is understanding. Those 
who live with unpleasant memories become neurotic  and those who live with pleasant ones become 
somnambulistic; sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof -- and the good thereof. 
 The Muses, in Greek mythology, were the daughters of Memory, and every writer is embarked, like Marcel 
Proust, on a hopeless search for time lost . But a good writer is one who knows how to "donner un sens plus pur 
aux mots de la tribu." Thanks to this purer sense, his readers will re act to his words with a degree of understanding 
much greater than they would have had, if they had reacted, in their ordinary self-conditioned or culture-
conditioned way, to the events to whic h the words refer. A great poet must do too much remembering to be more 
than a sporadic understander; but he  knows how to express himself in wo rds which cause other people to 
understand. Time lost can never be regain ed; but in his search for it, he may reveal to his readers glimpses of 
timeless reality. 
 Unlike the poet, the mystic is "a son of time present. " "Past and present veil God from our sight," says Jalal-
ud din Rumi, who was a Sufi first and only secondarily a great poet. "Burn up both of them with fire. How long 
will you let yourself be partitio ned by these segments like a reed? So long as it remains partitioned, a reed is not 
privy to secrets, neither is it vocal in response to lips or  breathing." Along with its mirror image in anticipation, 
emotionally charged memory is a barrier that shuts us out from understanding. 
 Natural piety can very easily be transformed into ar tificial piety; for some emotionally charged memories 
are common to all the members of a given society and lend themselves to being organized into religious, political

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

202
or cultural traditions. These traditions are systemati cally drummed into the young of  each successive generation 
and play an important part in the long drama of their conditioning for citizenship. Since the memories common to 
one group are different from the memories shared by othe r groups, the social solidarity created by tradition is 
always partial and exclusive. There is natural and ar tificial piety in relation to everything belonging to us, coupled 
with suspicion, dislike and contempt in relation to everything belonging to them. 
 Artificial piety may be fabricated , organized and fostered in two wa ys -- by the repetition of verbal 
formulas of belief and worship, and by the performance of sy mbolic acts and rituals. As might be expected, the 
second is the more effective method. What is the easiest  way for a skeptic to achie ve faith? The question was 
answered three hundred years ago by Pascal. The unbeliever must act "as though he believed, take holy water, have 
masses said etc. This will naturally cause you to believe and will besot you." (Cela vous abêtira -- literally, will 
make you stupid.) We have to be made stupid, insists Prof essor Jacques Chevalier, defending his hero against the 
critics who have been shocked by Pascal's blunt language; we have to stultify our intelligence, because "intellectual 
pride deprives us of God and debases us to the level of animals." Which is, of course, perfectly true. But it does not 
follow from this truth that we ought to besot ourselves in the manner prescribed by Pascal and all the propagandists 
of all the religions. Intellectual prid e can be cured only by devaluating pret entious words, only by getting rid of 
conceptualized pseudo-knowledge and opening ourselves to  reality. Artificial piety based on conditioned reflexes 
merely transfers intellectual pride from the bumptious individual to his even more bumptious Church. At one 
remove, the pride remains intact. For the convinced believer, understanding or  direct contact with reality is 
exceedingly difficult. Moreover, the mere fact of having a strong reverential feeling about some hallowed thing, 
person or proposition is no guarantee of th e existence of the thing, the infallibilit y of the person or the truth of the 
proposition. In this context, how inst ructive is the account of an experiment  undertaken by that most imaginative 
and versatile of the Eminent Victorians, Sir Francis Ga lton! The aim of the experi ment, he writes in his 
Autobiography, was to "gain an insight into the abject feelings of barbarians and others concerning the power of 
images which they know to be of human handiwork. I wanted  if possible to enter into these feelings. . . It was 
difficult to find a suitable objec t for trial, because it ought to  be in itself quite unfitted to arouse devout feelings. I 
fixed on a comic picture, it was that of Punch, and made believe in its possession of divine attributes. I addressed it 
with much quasi-reverence as possessing a mighty power to reward or punish the behavior of men toward it, and 
found little difficulty in ignoring the impossibilities of what I professed. The experiment succeeded. I began to feel 
and long retained for the picture a larg e share of the feelings th at a barbarian entertains toward his idols, and 
learned to appreciate the enormous potency they might have over him." 
 The nature of a conditioned reflex is such that, when the bell rings, the dog salivates, when the much 
worshiped image is seen, or the much repeated credo, litany or mantram is pronounced, th e heart of the believer is 
filled with reverence and his mind with faith. And this happens regardless of the content of the phrase repealed, the 
nature of the image to whic h obeisance has been made. He is not responding spon taneously to given reality; he is 
responding to some thing, or word, or gesture, which automatically brings in to play a previous ly installed post-
hypnotic suggestion. Meister Eckhart, that acutest of religious psychologists, clearly recognized this fact. "He who 
fondly imagines to get more of God in thoughts, prayers, pious offices and so forth than by the fireside or in the 
stall in sooth he does but take God, as  it were, and swaddle His head in a cl oak and hide Him under the table. For 
he who seeks God in settled forms lays hold of the form, while missing the God concealed in it. But he who seeks 
God in no special guise lays hold of him as He is in Hims elf, and such an one lives with the Son and is the life 
itself." 
 "If you look for the Buddha, you will not see the Buddha." "If you deliberately try to become a Buddha, 
your Buddha is samsara." "If a person seeks the Tao, that  person loses the Tao." "By intending to bring yourself 
into accord with Suchness, you instantly  deviate." "Whosoever will save his li fe shall lose it." There is a Law of 
Reversed Effort. The harder we try with the conscious wi ll to do something, the less we  shall succeed. Proficiency 
and the results of proficiency come only to those who have learned the paradoxical art of simultaneously doing and 
not doing, of combining relaxation with activity, of le tting go as a person in order that the immanent and 
transcendent Unknown Quantity may take  hold. We cannot make ourselves understand; the most we can do is to 
foster a state of mind, in which understa nding may come to us. What is this st ate? Clearly it is not any state of 
limited consciousness. Reality as it is given moment  by moment cannot be understood by a mind acting in 
obedience to post-hypnotic suggestion, or so conditioned by its  emotionally charged memories that it responds to

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

203
the living now as though it were the dead then. Nor is the mind that has been tr ained in concentration any better 
equipped to understand reality. For concentration is merely systematic exclusion, the shutting away from 
consciousness of all but one thought, one ideal, one image, or  one negation of all thought s, ideals and images. But 
however true, however lofty, however holy, no thought or ideal or image can contain reality or lead to the 
understanding of reality. Nor can the ne gation of awareness result in that  completer awareness necessary to 
understanding. At the best these things can lead only to a state of ecstatic dissociation, in which one particular 
aspect of reality, the so-called "spiritu al" aspect, may be apprehended. If reality  is to be understo od in its fullness, 
as it is given moment by moment, there must be an awaren ess which is not limited, either deliberately by piety or 
concentration, or involuntarily by mere  thoughtlessness and the force of hab it. Understanding comes when we are 
totally aware -- aware to the limits of our mental and physi cal potentialities. This, of course, is a very ancient 
doctrine. "Know thyself" is a piece of advice which is as old as civilization, and probably a great deal older. To 
follow that advice, a man must do more than indulge in  introspection. If I would know myself, I must know my 
environment; for as a body, I am part of the environment,  a natural object among other natural objects, and, as a 
mind, I consist to a great extent of my immediate reactions  to the environment and of my secondary reactions to 
those primary reactions. In practice "know thyself" is a call to total awareness. To th ose who practice it, what does 
total awareness reveal ? It reveals, first of all, the limitations of the thing which each of us calls "I," and the 
enormity, the utter absurdity of  its pretensions. "I am the master of my fate," poor Henley wrote at the end of a 
celebrated morsel of rhetoric, "I am the captain of my soul." Nothing could be furt her from the truth. My fate 
cannot be mastered; it can only be collabo rated with and thereby, to some extent , directed. Nor am I the captain of 
my soul; I am only its noisiest passenger -- a passenger who is not sufficiently important to sit at the captain's table 
and does not know, even by report, what the soul-ship looks like, how it works or where it is going. Total 
awareness starts, in a word, with th e realization of my ignorance and my  impotence. How do electro-chemical 
events in my brain turn into the perc eption of a quartet by Haydn or a thought, le t us say, of Joan of Arc? I haven't 
the faintest idea -- nor has anyone else . Or consider a seemingly much simple r problem. Can I lift my right hand? 
The answer is, No, I can't. I can on ly give the order; the actual lif ting is done by somebody else. Who? I don't 
know. How? I don't know. And when I have  eaten, who digests the bread and cheese? When I have cut myself, 
who heals the wound? While I am sleeping, who restores the tired body to strength, the neurotic mind to sanity. All 
I can say is that "I" cannot do any of these things. Th e catalogue of what I do not know and am incapable of 
achieving could be lengthened almost indefinitely. Even my claim to thi nk is only partiall y justified by the 
observable facts. Descartes's primal certa inty, "I think, therefore I am," turns out, on closer examination, to be a 
most dubious proposition. In actual fact it is I who do the thinking? Would it not be truer to say, "Thoughts come 
into existence, and sometimes I am aware of them"? Language, that treasure house of fossil observations and latent 
philosophy, suggests that this is in fact what happens. Whenever I find myself thinking more than ordinarily well, I 
am apt to say, "An idea has occurred to me," or, "It came into my head," or, "I see it clearly." In each case the 
phrase implies that thoughts ha ve their origin "out  there," in something analogous,  on the mental level, to the 
external world. Total awareness confirms the hints of idiomatic speech. In relation to the subjective "I," most of the 
mind is out there. My thoughts are a set of mental, but still external facts. I do not invent my best thoughts; I find 
them. Total awareness, then, reveals the following facts: th at I am profoundly ignorant, that I am impotent to the 
point of helplessness and that the most valuable elements in my personality are unknown quantities existing "out 
there," as mental objects more or less completely indepe ndent of my control. This discovery may seem at first 
rather humiliating and even depressing. But if I wholehearte dly accept them, the facts become a source of peace, a 
reason for serenity and cheerfulness. I am ignorant and impotent and yet, somehow or other, here I am, unhappy, 
no doubt, profoundly dissatisfied, but alive and kicking. In spite of everythi ng, I survive, I get by, sometimes I 
even get on. From these two sets of facts -- my survival on the one hand a nd my ignorance and impotence on the 
other -- I can only infer that the not-I, which looks after my body and gives me my best ideas, must be amazingly 
intelligent, knowledgeable and strong. As a self-centered ego, I do my best to interfere with the beneficent 
workings of this not-I. But in spite of  my likes and dislikes, in spite of my malice, my infatuations, my gnawing 
anxieties, in spite of all my overval uation of words, in spite of my self -stultifying insist ence on living, not in 
present reality, but in memory and antic ipation, this not-I, with whom I am associated, sustains me, preserves me, 
gives me a long succession of second ch ances. We know very little and can ach ieve very little; but we are at 
liberty, if we so choose, to co-operate with a great er power and a completer knowledge, an unknown quantity at

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

204
once immanent and transcendent, at on ce physical and mental, at once subjectiv e and objective. If we co-operate, 
we shall be all right, even if the wors t should happen. If we refuse to co-ope rate, we shall be all wrong even in the 
most propitious of circumstances. 
 These conclusions are only the first-fruits of total aw areness. Yet richer harvests are to follow. In my 
ignorance I am sure that I am eternally I. This convicti on is rooted in emotionally charged memory. Only when, in 
the words of St. John of the Cross, the memory has been  emptied, can I escape from th e sense of my watertight 
separateness and so prepare myself fo r the understanding, moment by moment, of  reality on all it s levels. But the 
memory cannot be emptied by an act of  will, or by systematic discipline  or by concentra tion -- even by 
concentration on the idea of emptiness. It can be emptie d only by total awareness. T hus, if I am aware of my 
distractions -- which are mostly emo tionally charged memories or phantasies based upon such memories -- the 
mental whirligig will automatically come to a stop and th e memory will be emptied, at least for a moment or two. 
Again, if I become totally aware of my resentment, my uncharitableness, these feelings will be replaced, during the 
time of my awareness, by a mo re realistic reaction to the events taking place around me. My awareness, of course, 
must be uncontaminated by approval or condemnation. Va lue judgments are conditioned, verbalized reactions to 
primary reactions. Total awareness is a primary, choiceless, impartial response to the present situation as a whole. 
There are in it no limiting conditioned reactions to the pr imary reaction, to the pure c ognitive apprehension of the 
situation. If memories of verbal form ulas of praise or blame should make their appearance in consciousness, they 
are to be examined impartially as any other present datum is examined. Professional moralists have confidence in 
the surface will, believe in punishments  and rewards and are adrenalin addict s who like nothing better than a good 
orgy of righteous indigna tion. The masters of the spiritua l life have little faith in the surface will or the utility, for 
their particular purposes, of rewards or punishments, and do not indulge in righteous  indignation. Experience has 
taught them that the highest good can never, in the very nature of things, be achie ved by moralizing. "Judge not 
that ye be not judged" is their watchword and total awareness is their method. 
 Two or three thousand years behind the times, a fe w contemporary psychiatrists have now discovered this 
method. "Socrates," writes Professor Carl Rogers, "devel oped novel ideas, which have proven to be socially 
constructive." Why? Because he was "notably non-defensiv e and open to experience. The reasoning behind this is 
based primarily upon the discove ry in psychotherapy that if we can add to  the sensory and visc eral experiencing, 
characteristic of the whole animal kingdom, the gift of a free undirected awareness, of which only the human 
animal seems fully capable, we have an organism which is as aware of the demands of the culture as it is of its own 
physiological demands for food and sex, which is just as aware of its desire for friendly relationships as it is aware 
of its desire to aggrandize itself; which is just as aware of its delicate and sensitive tenderness toward others as it is 
of its hostilities toward others. When man is less than fu lly man, when he denies to awareness various aspects of 
his experience, then indeed we have all too often reason to fear him and his behavior, as the present world situation 
testifies. But when he is most fully man, when he is hi s complete organism, when aw areness of experience, that 
peculiarly human attribute, is fully ope rating, then his behavior is to be trusted." Better late than never! It is 
comforting to find the immemorial commonplaces of mystical  wisdom turning up as a brand-new discovery in 
psychotherapy. Gnosce teipsum -- know yourself. Know yourself in re lation to your overt intentions and your 
hidden motives, in relation to your thinking, your physical functioning and to those greater not-selves, who see to it 
that, despite all the ego's attempts at sabotage, the thi nking shall be tolerably releva nt and the functioning not too 
abnormal. Be totally aware of what you do and think and of the persons with  whom you are in relationship, the 
events which prompt you at ev ery moment of your existen ce. Be aware impartially, re alistically, without judging, 
without reacting in terms of remembered words to your present cognitive reactions. If you do this, the memory will 
be emptied, knowledge and pseudo-knowledge will be rele gated to their proper place, and you will have 
understanding -- in other words, you will be in direct cont act with reality at every in stant. Better still, you will 
discover what Carl Rogers calls yo ur "delicate and sensitive tenderne ss toward others." And not only your 
tenderness, the cosmic tendern ess, the fundamental all-right ness of the universe -- in sp ite of death, in spite of 
suffering. "Though He slay me, yet will I trust Him." This is  the utterance of someone who is totally aware. And 
another such utterance is, "God is love."  From the standpoint of common sense, the first is the ra ving of a lunatic, 
the second flies in the face of all e xperience and is obviously untrue. But common sense is not based on total 
awareness; it is a product of convention, of organized me mories of other people's word s, of personal experiences 
limited by passion and value judgments, of hallowed notions  and naked self-interest. Total awareness opens the

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

205
way to understanding, and when any give n situation is understood, th e nature of all reality is made manifest, and 
the nonsensical utterances of the mystics are seen to be true, or at leas t as nearly true as it is possible for a verbal 
expression of the ineffable to be. One in all and all in One; samsara and nirvana are the same; multiplicity is unity, 
and unity is not so much one as not-tw o; all things are void, and yet all things are the Dharma-Body of the Buddha 
-- and so on. So far as conceptual know ledge is concerned, such phrases are completely meaningless. It is only 
when there is understanding that they make sense. For wh en there is understanding, ther e is an experienced fusion 
of the End with the Means, of the Wisdom which is the timeless realization of Suchness with the Compassion 
which is Wisdom in action. Of all th e worn, smudged, dog's-eared words in ou r vocabulary, "love"  is surely the 
grubbiest, smelliest, slimiest. Bawled from a million pulpits, lasciviously crooned through hundreds of millions of 
loud-speakers, it has become an outrage to good taste and decent feeling, an obscenity which one hesitates to 
pronounce. And yet it has to be pronounced, for, after all, Love is the last word. 
(From Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow)

<<<PAGEBREAK>>>

